He was the man who established the First French
Empire. To the French people he was a hero. To the French royalty he was their demise. Napoleon Bonaparte was a scourge to European
leaders, but the countries he conquered joined a vast empire spanning from Spain into Russia. Along with his control over Europe, Napoleon
Bonaparte conquered territories in the West Indies, Americas, and Northern Africa. Napoleon may have been the greatest conqueror
history has ever seen. Napoleon Bonaparte was born on August 15,
1769 on Corsica, an island in the Mediterranean Sea. Just before his birth the island of Corsica
was conquered by French forces, making baby Napoleon and his family subjects of King Louis
XV. At the age of nine Napoleon joined a military
school in France. He excelled in math and history and after
seven years he received a commission as an officer in the artillery division of the French
Army. Then in the summer of 1789 the French Revolution
began as Parisian mobs stormed the Bastille. The French Revolution concluded with the removal
of the monarchy. The country was relabeled as a republic, to
be governed by an assembly known as the Convention. Louis the XVI was guillotined in 1793 and
the French monarchy died with him. With the dismantling of the monarchy and aristocracy
France was thrown into what became known as The Reign of Terror. It is estimated around 300,000 suspects were
arrested and 17,000 people were executed during this time. It is during this tumultuous period that Napoleon
began to gain fame. His first major victory came when he defeated
Royalist forces supported by the British Navy at the port of Toulon. After the battle he was celebrated as a war
hero. In 1795 Napoleon gained even more fame when
he fired upon Royalists and defeated anti-Republic forces that threatened the new government. His battles against the forces that opposed
the new republic gained him favor with the leaders in the new government. Young general Bonaparte was appointed Commander
in Chief of the French Military, a turn of events eerily similar to the rise to power
of Emperor Palpatine in Star Wars. It was seven days later when Napoleon married
his first wife Josephine de Beauharnais- although they would later be divorced because she did
not birth a male heir for Napoleon. With his new power and prestige bestowed upon
him by the French government, Napoleon Bonaparte began his military conquest of the region. He started by defeating Austrian forces and
forcing Philipp von Cobenzl to sign the Treaty of Campo in 1797, which gave France control
over the majority of the Austrian nation. By 1799 Napoleon had acquired vast new territories
for France in Europe. He shifted his focus to Egypt where he hoped
to dominate the Eastern Mediteranian and disrupt British control of India. During this campaign French soldiers discovered
the Rosetta Stone by accident. The Rosetta Stone was brought to Europe and
eventually translated, unlocking the mysteries of Egyptian hieroglyphics. Upon returning to France in 1799 Napoleon
began to create a plan to overthrow the French government. This plot would come to be known as the Coup
d’état of 18 Brumaire. Napoleon succeeded in dismantling the current
governing body and set up a new government called The Consulate with himself as First
Consul. Napoleon had now conquered easterm Europe
and the French government. By now Napoleon had been First Consul for
almost a year. In this time he had instituted many popular
reforms, such as free secondary education and creating the Bank of France to improve
the stability of the empire. On December 24, 1800 though Georges Cadoudal
led monarchist rebels in an attempt to assassinate Napoleon Bonaparte with a homemade bomb. The assasination was planned to kill Bonaparte
while he was at the opera. As Napoleon sat in the Theater of the Republic
and the Arts in Paris watching the premier of The Creation by Joseph Haydn an explosion
erupted outside of the building. The assasination plot had failed and would
be called The “Infernal Machine” plot. It ended with the death of several people
outside the theater, but left Napoleon unharmed. This marked the first time that a bomb had
been used for an assassination attempt, and it was during this period in world history
that the word terrorism was first used in its current form. The term became synonymous with acts that
attempted to dismantle or destroy a leader or ideology. After gaining almost absolute power and surviving
more than one attempt on his life, Napoleon set his sights on conquest once again. In 1802 Napoleon sent French forces to the
West Indies to secure and protect France's interests in the region. He had decided it was time for an empire in
the Americas and began to assert dominance in the New World. He was mildly successful, but before Napoleon
could make his American Empire a reality he had a realization. His Navy was not powerful enough to defeat
the British. France suffered several defeats at the hands
and ships of the rival nation. Napoleon decided to consolidate his military
and sold the Louisiana Territory to the United States, which would come to be known as the
Louisiana Purchase. In return for the land Napoleon received money
that France badly needed. In 1804 The Consulate was transformed into
an empire and Napoleon was officially named Emperor of The First French Empire. The following year what was left of Austria
and Russia allied themselves with the British. Napoleon decided it was time to bring the
rest of Europe to their knees and began plans to invade England. But in a major defeat at the Battle of Trafalgar,
the British naval fleet commanded by Admiral Nelson destroyed the French Navy and ended
Napoleon’s plans to invade England. Realizing that the British Navy was again
too powerful, Napoleon turned his attention to conquering Russia and the Holy Roman Empire. In 1805 French forces defeated Tsar Alexander
I of Russia and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II at the Battle of Austerlitz. This eventually led to Tsar Alexander I signing
a treaty with Napoleon and giving Napoleon control of all of Eastern Europe. There was a time of relative peace in the
First French Empire until 1812 when Russia withdrew from the treaty and once again allied
itself with Britain. Napoleon made the decision that Russia must
be invaded and completely conquered if he was going to maintain control of the region. The invasion led to the bloodiest battle of
the Napoleonic Wars. The Battle of Borodino was fought just outside
Moscow. The Russian forces were estimated to have
suffered around 45,000 casualties, while the French lost approximately 30,000 men. Although both sides took great losses Tsar
Alexander I refused to surrender and Napoleon refused to abandon his conquest. But then the Russian winter did what the Russian
army could not. Due to lack of supplies and resources the
French army was forced to retreat from the bitter Russian winter and Napoleon returned
to Paris. In 1813 the combined forces of Russia, Prussia,
Austria, and Sweden defeated Napoleon’s armies in Europe. This forced Napoleon to abdicate his throne
on April 11, 1814. The European leaders decided to banish Napoleon
to the Mediterranean island of Elba. However, due to his craftiness and help from
loyal supporters Napoleon escaped captivity and returned to France in 1815. He reclaimed the throne in what was known
as the “Hundred Days.” After returning to France Napoleon re-established
his power and began his conquest once again. He swept across Europe meeting British forces
and their allies at the Battle of Waterloo. The British commander, the Duke of Wellington,
decided to wait for Napoleon to attack rather than use precious men and resources in an
advancing assault. Napoleon’s desire for conquest pushed him
to take the offensive. He sent his forces into battle. At first Napoleon was largely successful using
infantry and cavalry charges. His men were disciplined and believed in their
leader. Wellington and his generals were confident
that the battle was going to be lost due to the unrelenting French attacks. However, in a stroke of lucky timing, Prussian
forces joined the British Army and helped them repel the French advances. Napoleon decided to use his Imperial Guard,
the force always reserved to decide battles, to end the war. But due to a miscalculation, Napoleon split
his Imperial Guard instead of sending them into battle together. This led to both smaller forces being defeated
and a retreat by the French Army. The Battle of Waterloo made Great Britain
the dominant global power for the next one hundred years. After Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo the
leaders of Europe decided he needed to be sent further away. Napoleon Bonaparte was exiled to Saint Helena,
a remote volcanic island in the South Atlantic Ocean. The British kept two Navy frigates on patrol
of the island at all times, to ensure that Napoleon stayed in exile. Napoleon eventually died of cancer on May
5, 1821 on Saint Helena at the age of fifty-one. He was originally buried under three stone
slabs beneath two willow trees, but later his body was moved back to France where his
remains to this day. Due to Napoleon’s fame he became a legend. As with all legends incredible stories were
told and myths created about the man. Conspiracy theories that Napoleon was poisoned
instead of dying from natural causes spread like wildfire. People believed that his remains were stolen
on the way back to Europe and secretly buried at an undisclosed location in Paris. You have probably heard the claim that Napoleon
was extremely short. This was actually one of the myths that came
out of the Napoleonic legends. It was true that Napoleon was called “le
petit caporal,” or “the little corporal.” But this name had nothing to do with his height. Instead, his men used it as a term of endearment. It was said that when Napoleon died he was
five feet two inches tall - two inches shorter than Kevin Hart. However, it has been determined that the measurement
provided was in French inches, which at the time were longer than English inches. When the measurement is converted, Napoleon
was closer to five feet six inches tall (making him two inches taller than Kevin Hart… sorry
Kevin). This means that Napoleon was actually average
height for a male in Europe at the time he was alive. Was Napoleon the greatest conqueror ever? His military, political, and social accomplishments
were impressive and some still exist today. He survived several assasination attempts
and escaped exile only to return to Europe and very nearly take back his Empire. Regardless of his height or legends, Napoleon
Bonaparte was most assuredly a force to be reckoned with in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. He conquered vast amounts of land across Europe,
controlled several territories overseas, and marched deep into Russia. Europe had not been unified under one ruler
since the Roman Empire, and Napoleon Bonaparte was the first conqueror to succeed in creating
an Empire in Europe and abroad where so many before him had failed- even if only briefly. Now go check out our video on Genghis Khan
or Julius Caesar and decide for yourself who was actually the greatest conqueror of all
time! Don’t forget to tell us who you decided
was the best in the comments.