Lux stay at Sahara Star ⭐ !! Nice rooms, Variety of restaurants, Bars & Coffee Shops. A grand Hotel just mins away from both the Airport terminals..

It was clean, stylish, roomy with excellent service in where we had dinner. Food was good and great value for money and service was attentive and efficient.

It was nice. We arrived bit early and they entertained us in a very warm welcoming manner. Place was clean

Very pleasant stay ambience also very nice agsin will visit at sahar staff also cop-rate food also very nice

The hotel wa nice and clean. Location is excellent, as for outstation guests, it walkable from and to airport. Room service was also good

Great stay and friendly staff at the hotel. Loved the lagoon views from my room. Easily accessible from the domestic airport and just 15 mins to international airport

The hotel is near to airport and very covininent. But the room the bed are not comfortable like other rooms. Also unable to connect reception from room. Already given that feed back in hotel too.

Really appreciate the hospitality team of sahara. Wonderful experience including food, service, and infra. Looking forward to revisit again.

She was very nice, her nature was good and good attention was given, the service was also good and the breakfast was also good

Rooms too far from the lift, bathrooms are old, not much clean also, in room dining service too late because lift is far

Very good hotel. What a view. Light music at center of hotel in evening time. Feels very cool. Rooms with automatic open close window curtains is lovely. Breakfast is also very good. Over all nice experience.

Overrated with 0 amenities and rude staff behaviour. Do not recommend this. Got worst room worth 15k

Everything is good like food and there rooms and yes there was issued with the bathroom flush and they offer me to change the room so that's good

Had a wonderful stay at sahar star. Comfortable room, delicious food, overall a quality hotel to stay for your business/personal stay. Loved the place.

4. Stay was good, food is decent, room dining we didn’t try, it’s way tooooooo expensive and property is old but good. Rooms are spacious with balcony, outside room very old carpets so it gives not so good feeling, rest is good. Inside hotel view is awesome

Service was pathetic, i am so disappointed, i will never choose sahar star again. Totally waste of money.

We had a very good ans pleasant stay. Food quality was awesome. The staff is very adjusting and co-operative.

Comfortable stay with luxury hotel

Sahar has different ambience and look when you are staying at 6th floor because you get sunroof rooms

Overall experience was amazing mr mayank @ reception upgraded to suite room very helpful guy, breakfast was very nice so many varieties

Food was very bad room wash stinking out dated hotel. .

Overall ambience of the hotel is unbeatable in mumbai. Must take 6th floor room for sunroof experience

Bathrobes is not available in rooms

The sahar star hotel is the best hotel i have visited ever the lagoon view of the hotel is fantastic loved very much

It’s really amazing vibes, ambiance, helpful staffs and pretty amazing food.

Stay and food was average. Food is very expensive and services are also poor. In the middle of the night our room ac stopped working, we had to call service and they repaired but didnt help much.

It is great to stay at sahar star hotel mumbai
every thing up to the mark. Full marks. Good hospitality and prompt service

Amazing hospitality with cooperative staff. The stay was pleasant and delightful. Breakfast was happening and delicious

Not at all a 5 start property, room/furniture was below average, bed not at all comfortable. You could find dust and bathroom was like a 2-3 star property. Breakfast was average

Lobby stinks, room ac is not working. If you have a late checkin, be ready to carry your luggage to your room by your own, they don't have staff as told by front desk.

Excellent stay, delicious food and clean rooms, very good ambience and location of this hotel. This hotel is very close to airport.

Good location, very poor food taste, lobby and corridor is very nice three restaurant are also nicely located.

Booking made for smoking rooms but at time of check inn they denied and told us for suite upgrade which was 18000 + taxes per night per room

Best location for t1 airport goers. Food is good. Stay was comfortable. Staff is soft spoken and friendly

Hi, good hotel with ambiances are very good. Enjoyed good breakfast and totally enjoyed the stay at the hotel.

The restaurant manager is allowing my guest to leave the table unless they paid the bill inspite of telling them send the bill to room number while checkout normally we pay

Property is great to stay, rooms are clean and neat and refer for family to stay at sahar star hotel

I was really happy the way, make my trip guys assisted me on the stay. The resolution was prompt and apt. It has been an amazing experience with make my trip. Looking forward to more experience with you guys

It was really grt. Nice sahar experience. Lagoon view is really great. Peaceful and relaxing environment.

My rating in scale of 5: location 5, theme 5, facilities - - 2 (minus, staff: - 2 (minus, food - 2, hygiene - 1, maintenance - 1. There is a kind of lost in energy feeling in the hotel. Such a great design, expected more from it. Perhaps, mr. Subrato, would really be upset seeing this fate of the property. If i am allowed saying it, they should give management to some able brands to run the property before it goes completely kaput

Wow so nice

Excellent food and great ambience feels good to stay here has a legendary history to boast about would revisit again

No bathrobe amd shampoo in the bathroom also the bathtub was broken very disappointing people comes with lot of expectations but it was not worthy

Ambience is good… hotel room & staff is very good…. They provide sweet when we entered room… everything is awesome… fuki restaurant is too good.. I enjoyed a lot with my friends and family

This is the one of the best property of mumbai. The room was perfect. The staff was super helpful and friendly

Amazon room and hotel. Staff is very friendly n helpful i booked airport pick up service n driver was before time n he s very polite n kind. Check in was very fast. I arrived early morn-in with no sleep but the reception staff was very nice n did very fast check in. Overall till now experience is amazing. Love the room and main amazing thing s balcony

Staycation with friends never felt this better before………………Amazing staff, bathroom aminities, Wonderfull experience

Sahara star is really a star ⭐️shines Beautiful and Bright in all aspects..Excellent service with disciplined and sober staff..very good food and above all Amazing Awesome Ambiance very positive pleasant Vibes🌈😇🙏Thank you Sahara Star for always helping us to make wonderful memories whenever we stay with you

Average stay. The service was not up to the mark. It will be my first and last experience of the sahar hotel. The room was also not that good. I mean the heavy amount we pay was not worth it for the sahar star.

Booked a lagoon suite for dc 31st when i reached there they said maintenance issue and offered me a city view suite. Or 2 standard rooms lagoon facing. Was approx in the reception 2 hours. There is a big gap between sahar star and mmt. They don’t know about guests coming in from mmt. This has to be worked out between mmt and them. Eventually i settled for the lagoon facing one because on 31st what would i do in the corner with a big suite.

Great experience to stay at sahar star hotel and hospitality. Front office and room service excellent.

A beautiful hotel called sahar star quite next to mumbai domestic airport. I booked a mercury lagoon facing room with balcony. Nice ambiance & very beautiful in the night time when it is lit up and the water fountain noise all the time is amazing. Food menu is quite expensive but loads of options.

Wonderful property lovely ambience great food plenty of activities one of a kind stadium look hotel.

The room which has given to my guest was very far from the lift. And the moment we enter into the room it was pathetic. Stinky and very very small in size. Whenever i book any room from mmt i always get the below average rooms. Hence further i will not book any rooms from mmt and will also not suggest to my friends and family to book it from mmt.

We loved our stay here. 5 star for ambience and reception was warm and welcoming. Rooms were decent clean. Best part was the setting and many restaurant options. Bit expensive but worth. We had breakfast and it was perfect and worth every penny.

I stay there with my family Hotel was good, hotel staff Was nice in behaviour, breakfast service and verity of food should improve there is no proper service system and not proper buffet breakfast counters. Rooms and hotel ambiance was very nice. Overall stay is good 👍

Doesn't match the standards of a 5 star hotel, when we checked in the hotel, no one assisted for lauguage. Light extension switch board was hanging, party light was not working. We have found used hand towel in washbasin during our check in and the same was highlighted to service assistant however, there was no response from frontdesk.

The rooms were really bad for what we were paying. The carpets were disgusting, there was pubic hair on the bathroom floor, bed was not comfortable, the woodwork looked cheap. Overall the place was overpriced and in need of a major renovation. The rates need to be brought down to 30% at least. The only good part was the courteous staff and the breakfast

Pleasant stay great access to t1 airport, nice spacious rooms but f&b average, too expensive and not great

It was good experience all together, however room service experience is not upto the mark. South indian buffet are good at breakfast, it is hard to decide the taste for other foods

The place was good. The breakfast was average. I had booked a venues premier room, with a bathtub but it was not working fine, the water in it was draining in the sink. I had informed the hotel but no one came to fix it. It was my anniversary day so i was not very happy with the setup

Escaped while staying the room. A mega fixed light fallen in the bathroom. Just escaped by god grace. Very shocked about the bad maintenance such this star hotel. I will never stay here in my life time.

Very bad experience. Wastage of money the staff behaviour is very bad in future i am not staying in this hotel very bad experience.

I booked this hotel for a perfect view and cleaness but there is nothing such as view mirrors are not cleaned well looks blur and washrooms are not neat didnot expected this from sahar star

Not a good experience as shown in the preview pictures, not worth of money spent. Similar hotels are available within same prices with good quality. - overall quality wise rating is 1 out of 5. - room amenities were very old. - rooms were unclean and seemed unhygienic. (bathroom specifically)
- room lightings was not working properly. - breakfast was good. - staff were well behaved and helpful.

The hotel vibes are fantastic. Helpful staff around the clock. Got last minute deal with mm t that gave major savings.

It was average hotel experience with the price. You will not feel the wow. Service are normal. .

The rooms are not worth the tarrif charged. Lot of light switches were not functioning properly. However, the overall ambience of the hotel is very good.

Staff was friendly and helpful. Whole each restaurant functions independently, the staff was able to provide us with food and drinks from the other restaurant upon request. They made us feel at home. Willing to stay there again in my next trip to mimbai.

It’s a good property to stay in mumbai for business or leisure. Very good location and good food too.

Excellent place, great pool, nice food, a new way of living. Will keep coming whenever have a chance

I have booked for my parents for 25th anniversary their experience was superb and the services were very very good

The room venues premier was not at all worth a penny the view claimed in the photos is totally not visible the room looks shabby because of the interiors done in it, they have lots of options in the breakfast menu but none of them tasted good.

Very good property and nice stay. I have stay many times. Very very good location. I highly recomanded

Immerse yourself in luxury and hospitality at sahar star, mumbai. From the opulent interiors to impeccable service, every detail is crafted to perfection. The lavish accommodations, world-class amenities, and culinary delights make it a standout choice for an unforgettable experience in the heart of mumbai.

It’s an amazing experience to visit this place. Amenities are in abundance with perfect services. Must visit place. Well structured and maintained hotel. Hoping to visit once again

It’s an amazing experience to visit this place. Amenities are in abundance with perfect services. Must visit place. Well structured and maintained hotel. Hoping to visit once again

Will never come again to stay in your property neither recoment any one else had a horrible experience

I checked in and was given the room at 11. My room was on 2nd floor. On the way to the hotel roo. I saw rooms corridor are very dull. The carpet needs to be changed. The view was very good as i was facing the lagoon. The breakfast had huge spread bit keeping an uncomfortable q manager right outside the elevator was not correct. The crockery to be changed immediately. Chipped broken and discolored. I wud say that property to be upgraded

I didn’t value for money as room size too small. You can’t watch tv also as it is on one corner. Bedroom size is very small

The place is beautiful with good food and warm room service. The rooms are neat and clean. We had a pleasant stay at sahar

Rooms are spacious and comfortable. Food is delicious and at reasonable price
staff is courteous and helpful

I stayed at this hotel with my family for one night and i was very disappointed with the service and the facilities. The air conditioner in our room was set to a very low temperature of 24 degrees, which was too cold for us. We asked the staff to increase the temperature, but they told us that it was the hotel policy and that they could not do anything about it. Later, they admitted that it was due to some renovations that were going on in the hotel. We called the duty manager, who was very rude and unhelpful. He repeated the same thing that the staff had told us and said that the hotel was sold out and he could not offer us any other room. He did not apologize or try to solve the problem. It was 1. 30 am by then and my child had fallen asleep, so we had no choice but to endure the cold night. I felt cheated and mistreated by the hotel staff and management. This is not what i expect from a 5 star property. I do not recommend this hotel to anyone who values comfort and customer service.

Wonderful and luxurious stay breakfast buffet was amazing with cooperative staff, hotel location is just 5 mins from domestic airport

The hotel is a piece of art, the lagoon facing rooms are my personal favourite. The breakfast has vast options. Very happy with the service

It was a transit stay … check in n check out had been very smooth and the front desk was very courteous to quickly allot us a room 🥰

Hotel his good but service veer y poor food very expensive breakfast good pool clean housekeeping poor no proper clean

Good and comfortable stay in the property. Check in process smooth. Only thing is there is no elevator from the parking to the lobby so you have to walk back all the way to the main entrance. Otherwise comfortable stay and close to food options and airport

Very humble staff, beautiful ambience extremely hygienic, amazing food. I loved this stay. Kids loved it too.

It's hightime to go for maintanance. Passage carpet, curtains, lobby paint and roof glass everything needs maintanace or replacement. The grandness of the property is lost.

It is overall good excellent experience, nice memorable stay, no words to say! superb! all services are excellent

A perfect stay with family. From rooms to breakfast everything was just perfect. A good range of food outlets for lunch and dinner. Airport pick up and drop was smooth. Well trained and super polite staff assisted during check in and check out. Overall a great experience.

Namak was awesome, food is good, ambience is beautiful and cozy ! little renovation would do better at the property though

Mosquito in room. No good service i will no stay next time u are b careful not stay in hotel jhjjjjjj

Hospitality and services are very well provided.. We are surely visit again.. My whole family loved 🥰 stay at sahara star.

Good
super 👍😊 Happy my especially ☺️
Good hotel 🏨
super room
super service
super clean
nice hotel view

Courteous staff. Warm gestures to the guests make us feel to opt them every time you think of staying in mumbai

I was staying in with my wife. The ambience of the hotel is lively. Great lounges and muti cuisine options. The reception works very quick for check-in & check-out. Room was very clean. I'd look forward to stay again.

Staying in a space ship like resort is special. The lagoon facing rooms give the vibes of tropical lagoon. The resturants and their themes are unique. Indeed out of this world

Polite staff , good rooms and world class service

My recent stay at the hotel sahara star left much to be desired. While the establishment has potential, it fell short in several aspects. The most notable disappointment was the exorbitant prices of the food; the menu seemed to be designed to cater exclusively to those with deep pockets. To add to the frustration, the room service experience was far from smooth. Overall, the less-than-great experience at this hotel, coupled with the steep food prices and the questionable handling of sensitive information, make it hard to recommend. It's clear that improvements in service and pricing strategies are essential for this establishment to meet the expectations of its guests.

wonderful getaway with my family. loved it. I will keep coming back. over and over and over again. its amazing. don't have enough words to describe my fun at Sahara star.

It was a good stay however i find bathroom lacking the quality compare to reputation of the hotel. The toilet jet is leaking, lack of light in the bathroom also a let down. There were few mosquitoes in the bedroom. I would have rated 3 but late check in and late check out together with the breakfast which was good changed my rating to 4.

Rooms have great view from the balcony and ambience. Rooms are spacious enough. They have 4 restaurants inside which are also good in taste.

No one cares to reply to your calls, messages or even emails. The lazy and poor management is not worth the money you pay for your stay.

The room size is great but upkeep needs attention. The basin was clogged and the flush leaked. The carpet is bit dated and room is a bit dark

First of all they don't pay heed to any request you make. They simply don't care. Even if you reach at 2. 30 which 30 mins later then your check in time the rooms will not be ready. The rooms are old, most of the lights not working. The main attraction lagoon doesn't have any water. The pool is not heated so we could not use it. Breakfast was below average. Food prices are exorbitant.

I had the pleasure of staying at this hotel, and it truly exceeded my expectations. The ambiance was outstanding, creating a serene and inviting atmosphere that made me feel at ease throughout my stay. The professionalism of the staff was exceptional; they were attentive, friendly, and always ready to assist with a smile. Moreover, the service provided was of the highest quality, ensuring that my every need was met promptly and efficiently. From check-in to check-out, my experience was nothing short of fantastic. I would highly recommend this hotel to anyone seeking a top-notch hospitality experience, and i look forward to returning in the future.

It was really a comfortable stay. The lenin was hygienic. The staff was polite. The room was clean.

My wife and i decided to have a short stay at this property. I used to come here very often as a kid in the 80's when this place was called the centaur. My stay was pleasant and the staff were very kind and hospitable.

Staff behavior is terrible. They are rude. Their staff are liers. They have made some fancy rules which is not only funny but also impracticle. I will not recommend this hotel to anyone.

Best service and ambience best food it was amazing experience and enjoyed a lot. Cleanliness and hygiene was maintained well

Loved the place and experience. Good food with 100 s of option. Amazing staff. Will visit again soon

The rooms were quite small and the food was very average. I've stayed in the same hotel in the past, but their quality has deteriorated. Not worth staying for the price charged.

Loved the view. Awesome lagoon view from the room. But no complimentary drinks received. If you have not got the room near the lift then u have to walk very long

Very bad stinky rooms. Not at all worth the armoury they charge. There are many options available in the same price

Previously we got a room with ac leakage issue but after complaining they changed the room then it was good

All good except queen bed provided for family with 2 child members instead of king as declared. Extra bed provided v late night after 3 reminders.

Most friendly and helpful receptionist and staff ever, lovely and great first impression of hotell. Food was good and great value for money and service was attentive and efficient.

It's awesome property located at set location in mumbai with nice and big pool and wonderfuly designed

Beautiful room and balcony service 5 star and breakfast was very tasty and to many items there overall i love it with 5star rating

Good for photography and location wise luxury interior good for friends and kids family
very nice swimming pool for kids and adults

Admission process was smooth, attended promptly with required courtesy. Since allocated room was not found upto expectations, it was changed with some persuasion. Food served was good

Sahara earth ( dining)staffs were very helpful,kind,polite & courteous…. Front desk staff was not at all helpful , the executive who checked me in was not having a smile on his face, it was looking like he was forced to do his duty.

I was asked to carry my luggage on my own. In the restaurant when i asked the waitress to fetch me a tea, she refused and asked to take myself. Meanwhile when i went to get a tea, she had already cleared my table. Zero hospitality for a 5 star. To get to the lift you have to walk 500 m from the room on the floor. There was no food or drinks in mini bar to snack on. It was all empty.

This location is exceptional in every way, from the food to the service. Every time i visit, i love my stay.

It was an absolutely n wonderful stay all the staff as well as dinner breakfast outstanding n delicious everytime i wold like to stay in this property i want to say it was an amassing stay in sahar star hotel near domestic airport shantacruz mumbai

Best view in the city very god d clean nyc atmosphere staff is very good service is also very good

Very good experience unbelievable hotel with unbelievable brilliant services very good hotel. I want to visit again and again in this hotel

Friendly staff and clean place. Loved the experience. Good location and quick response from the staff when needed. Breakfast served was amazing.

Loved my stay at this beautiful property. The food, gym facilities are quite good. The washrooms are clean and my favourite is the swimming pool.

Room was fine but hotel is tooooo noisy. If other guest r making noise then understand but its their own hotel staff is doing some repairs 2 am middle of the night. Many other guest even shouted at the hotel staff to wrap up the work but still they didn’t

Good big size rooms. Carpet is old but room is clean and big. Lobby, lift, passage is very good and clean as well.

It’s a nice hotel, good food, beautiful location, good ambiance’s with better reception area but could not feel the welcome check in and check out like a 5 star which was missing with less coordination. It was looking like either the front desk was full relaxed or full pressure with no enthusiasm to welcome.

Terrible stay. Room is not in good condition. no cleanliness. staff is rude n no hospitality. breakfast is not good

It was comfortable and at a great location. Well maintained property. Although checked in so late in the night so didn't get to explore much

Best food for best location and best service by staff. . . . . . . . . Superb

room sarvice good ceiling good foog good stap good 👍 boothroom very nice 👌 all most sarvice best aria good

Loved the stay, staff was very helpful and loved the food, ambience, hospitality, luxury, connectivity from airport and local places

The stay was great, except for a few things like the room's light setting was not working properly, no mini fridge items.

Excellent location, average food (buffet dinner and breakfast, well maintained property, poorly informed staff at the front desk

Very bad service room in side bath not working or iron table in side room not available. Room side bad smell

I wish the roof of the venus room would have been the clear class. The main reason was to book the room was the roof of the room which i didn't get to see l, the sky wasn't visible actually nothing was visible properly.

It was an amazing experience! the staffs were very cooperative, had a great experience the food was also magnificent.

Its a value for money, had a great time, nice food nice hospitality great staff, wonderful location

Room lights were not working, when we called to change the room

It was a good experience at the sahar star. The food was good and the staff were also good to us except one of them. The property is indeed beautiful

The ambience of the hotel is lovely. But the not well organised. Morning breakfast area is noisy and unruly. Nobody knows who is incharge. They changed my table three times and my orders at food stations were in total confusion. The showers are great. The room area is peaceful but when it rains the noise is alarming. The restaurant with indian cuisine is way too expensive. Compared to price i paid, i would expect a different environment and a well managed service.

Not matching 5 star category. It should have made much better by improving food and the staaf who were rude.

Great experience and great ambiance with clean and spacious rooms. Would love to stay here again. Best hotel near airport

Great location, really pleasant and clean room. The dining room for our breakfast was large and ample food

The inner sanctum of the hotel lined with the specialty restaurants and the lagoon is instagram worthy and we observed quite a few guests using it for the same. We ate at the specialty asian and lebanese restaurants and found the food good enough. The swimming pool is great. The rooms are as expected of a hotel of this type. However, some of the fixtures will need an upgrade soon.

5

It was amazing stay. Great hospitality

Quality, service standards of this hotel and gone down since I last saw this place. staff doesn’t seemed to be trained well, hotel smells like damp. food is below par quality. I would not recommend this place ever.

Excellent hospitality of the customer care, best balcony view. Good ambiance right place to stay with frnds and family

Very good service your team's

The premises is beautiful and so are the rooms

The stay was decent
but the room had many switches which weren't working
and the bathtub and shower had a major leak which was unexpected from a hotel like sahar star

It's a good property, well maintained. Clean & professional staff. Good service. Definitely to be booked again.

Super 😊👍

This is my 5th stay in sahar star, rooms are well cleaned and maintain all the hygine. Food is very delicious. But need to improve room services, for water bottle i wait 1 hour after multiple calls i get that. Overall experience is very good.

Property is good maintained and service is good enough all is ok, but reception is poor at the time of cheek in

Excellent hotel structure and interiors, clean, well equipped and comfortable rooms, polite staff, great food and ambience!

Very good stay. Friendly behaviour, positive approach of the all staff, best breakfast, best beverage, very good gym and spa, and totally fundastic hotel. Super

The overall ambience was very good. Spacious room with 360 degree view. On a starry night it gives a super experience. The breakfast spread was eminently huge. Overall a great experience.

Average stay rating from my side. I expected more from a 5-star hotel like this. Room is old. Stinky bathroom. Tv does not work.

I wouldn't recommend anyone to use this hotel. Problem started from the first minute. Room lock was not opening and we were made to stand and wait in the passage for more than 30 min. Being 7 star hotel, there is no as in the passages which was surprising. 9nce we went inside the room, bathroom was stink because of the drain clogging. They promised to fix it but never did anything. Worse than the 3 star or normal hotel where they would have given accomodation in another room. Pathetic customer service and no quick decission making to help the customer. A big no for anyone.

Very good location for airport travellers and most luxurious property. Indoor roof gardens and wonderful ambience. Sahar star is the best location hotel for airport travelers with most luxury features and best cuisines i stay here at many instances and feel like going there all the time

I have stayed there multiple times and each time is more relaxing than the time before. Makes me want to come back again sooner! the staff were helpful about my injury and made sure everything was at utmost convenience for me. Kudos to amazing hospitality!

My stay at sahar star was amazing. Rooms were very comfortable. I got great deal from mm t too.

All. The room was perfect. The service wonderful. The food was excellent, we had so many options and the prices were so affordable. The pool was so clean, and the pool service was always on time. Extremely recommended for couples and families. Nothing!

Staff was cordial but the ac in the room was very bad during the day. The room was not well lit and the stay was ok

Pleasurable. Comfortable. Great relaxation and different restaurants had so much to say. Bakery products very good. Ginger tea in the lobby very nice

Loved the hospitality of the hotel. Had a wonderful experience. Everything was perfect. The food options were amazing

It was short stay due to urgently torture. It was nice check in was very s moot and hotel executive was very polite and humbale

Smaller than usual, 5 stars. No cleaning or laundry bags there, ac and control panel are not working properly.

Basically the electric point as well as the ac is not working whole night. Electrician was come to my room but he failed to solved that problem.

Enjoyed hotel ambience and fabulous food of namak and other restaurants. Hotel inside view is mind blowing. Swimming pool is very nice. Pleasant stay.

Ac was not working

Excellent services, food was superb, all the staff front area as well as house keeping and room services dept of the hotel is superb.

Loved the way they treated and very co-oprative staff than-xx ill come back soon
very nice ambiance and amazing room

We were facing issues with regards to room lights and a/c. Light board was not working to dim the lights, cooling was bad. We call for hotel assistance around 4am due to poor cooling, but it didn't help. Please take care of your room maintenance in future.

Bad check in experience and bad check out experience, not old days sahar star they had forget hospitality everything was messed up

Too beautiful and serene, staff was friendly and dedicated towards our comfortable stay. They managed to get us early checkin too

Electrical systems were faulty. Very poor room service. The service reception desk staff was not cordial. Couldn't even charge my mobile phone during the stay.

The staff is super friendly and the food is really awsome. The view from the balcony to the lagoon is awesome the path to elevators gives you a feeling of being in an outer space colony

The rooms take forever to reach and the corridor is suffocating. Repair work going on inside the hotel was major put off, the noise was echoing. So there are better hotels with same price. Food is super expensive.

The whole ambience is very nice. Food quality is very good. Excellent stay. Will visit again and again.

good food good embiyance but very expensive room dining food is good room interiar to good i m very happy

terrible service and very disgusting staff. made my special dauhorrifying experience.

Good ambience and lovely environment loaded it good it was 🇮🇳

Good service good food

Food is fantastic
must visit for a stay. The staff are very polite and the service is really awesome.

It’s nice to stay this is our 2 0r a3 rd visit to stay this hotel happy n satisfied the staff of the hotel cooperative

Location is good, but hotel need renovations, standards are low, maintenance is poor, my advice please look for some other hotel, i am not satisfied, carpets were dirty, idea of balconies inside is good but needs air conditioning

Sahar star is very beautiful hotel with beautiful ambiance and best experiences. Their are so many restaurants n lounge with good food and service

Had good experience staying. staff is disciplined and Corporative. Good ambience. really loved it

The stay was very nice, there are lots of amenities to spend time. Ambiance gives you a totally different feeling, makes the mood fresh. The service in the restaurant is very nice. Food in the restaurant is super delicious and worth every penny. Morning breakfast had a variety of options to try from. You can use zomato gold to avail discounts on food bills. Overall will rate stay 4 star
food and ambiance 5 star

Stay was decent staff is very cooperative overall property location n property cleanyness too good room was also very clean all equipment was working well so from my side it was a very good experience for sahar star property

This hotel is ever green and the team also very good i say-ed for 3 days the hotel is very comfortable to access any places to mumbai
i got a small problem about i request to them in side of hotel view unfortunately
the hotel was full

Nice place food is good atmosphere is very nice. Area is very clean. Service is good. Properly location find by google map

The hotel staff was really good and quick in their service. Checkin was quick. Loved the rooms quite spacious and clean. Not much to do inside the hotel. Corridor seemed to be little packed and hot.

Near to airport it has everything. Restaurants, fitness center. Its one of the huge 7 star hotel near domestic arrival airport.

Excellent service and hospitality as always. Clean rooms swimming pool and lots lots of amenities. Anyone wishing to come to mumbai should stay in this property

Food quality not good verry bad bill amaunt - 2 roti and panir tikka masala chas sweet this verity out side hotel worth 400 but verry good quality ( ❌ roti sheep quality not proper cook and panir tikka Masala verry bad taste

I had stayed in sahar star about 10 years back, and now i find the old charm maintained as much. The staff is well trained and the rooms with the open area view are excellent.

Overall it was fine but we had ac water leakage issue thrice which required intervention of maintaining staff. This is not desirable at all. Breakfast options were limited as compared to my previous stay in 2018.

I had desert, which was decent, looked good tasted good, definitely worth the stay. Near to the airport

Found lizard in the room and there was no cooling in thr room. Hotel staff only resolved my issue after 36 hours.

Hi, nice hotel ambience, excellent service & tasty food. We didn’t got balcony room, else it would be perfect start

My last trip to sahar star hotel via make my trip is excellent, every thing between check in and check out is remarkable. I really enjoyed.

Food average
services average
ac working poor
over all not worth staying
shall not consider next time

The locatuon is excellent so was the service. Accueil was good too. Quick check in. Staff was courteous. The manager mr kalra was extremely helpful

I have find this hotel at make my trip and it’s nice hotel with nice location. We have enjoyed a lot and looking forward to be back soon in this property!

The stay was awesome and the food was fantastic with japanese restaurant, the ambience is full of beauty beyond the doubt and the place is going to be next visit also

The stay here was amazing with courteous staff and luxury services. Food was also amazing and stay was really a step ahead.

Room is very specious. Bathtub was the best part of overall experience. Good service. Staff is very friendly.

This peoperty has a unique lagoon infrastructure and have excellent hospitality. Rooms are clean and have unique layouts. Overall a pampering experience

Fantastic hotel and so unique hotel i really love sahar star very polite staff and all services are very good

A person who stayed before me, they would have cut there nails, and then i have saw nail on desk, no 1 have clear, that clear that nail, and i have found screw in washroom

The location is good and is reachable to the airport, bk c & shopping places. But, the service level & quality of food is not worth the cost.

Stunning central courtyard but quality of service can definitely be improved. Just doesn’t give the feel of the professional delivery ones expects at this level.

Lequire rate is so extreme level high. Room was good. Bath room accessory not proper work. Hotel ambience so good. Restaurant namak restaurant food was good

Amazing property great restaurants, issue with the closing time of lounge,

The service was pretty good overall. Can be a lil faster. Breakfast was amazing. In house dining menu was pretty limited. No birthday discount given. However worth the experience

The ambiance of the hotel was great, you can spend your quality time with in the hotel without going out anywhere

There was constant noise whole night from the corridor and adjoining rooms which disturbed my sleep.

Good location, great property. But the rooms require better acoustics. Noise from the central park area and adjoining rooms can be irritating, especially if you want to sleep early

They offered me a very bad room with mostly devices and amenities not working which were changed after i called. Staff was very rude at the time of service like “ ab-hi hi den a padega “ even after pure authorisation on cards were done

Despite booking the same category (lagoon facing, the room wasn't similar to earlier 2-3 times. I feel if you book through mm t they put you to a lower category and allocate a room far away from elevators (very long walk to reach the room. Seems no standardization and allocation is as per staff's wishes. In all, despite staying 3-4 times in last 45 days, i felt pricing mismatches from expectations of a star hotel

Very nice hotel nice place to eat and drink, i got a chance to stay here for 1 night, it was very nice

Hotel is not clean. Toilets need to be changed. Food is terrible. Only plus is close to airport.

Experience was fantastic and the staff was also kind but the only thing i hate is the lift issue

Bathrooms were very dirty water leakage nulls were broken i called staff 3 times to clean and fix the problem but no one came i was excited to stay but i face worst expirecne instead of that i have paid to onter hotels that woulb be better for me not worth

Very good room
and room service cleaning best food 6 th floor room is excellent and night vision in room is excellent

The room and space was amazing, the hospitality of the stay was quite good. Breakfast buffet was amazing, the room was up to the mark as soon in the picture. Really spent a magnificent time over there.

It was nice experience, hotel view was very nice. Food was nice too and staff was very much helpful.

staff is well dear corporation wala staff mila mujhe so it's a very nice so I'm very happy 😊 nice it's

After long time in mid night they change my room techno-cal staff was arrogand very poor show hotel is very hope less

Fantastic as from 2011 i m staying. Just the view from the balcony. I alway prefer earth or mercury room with balcony

Cleaniliness could be improved a bit being a 5 star hotel and some amenities to be increased like facewash

Everything about the property was just amazing. Had a great time staying at the property. Everything was perfect, especially the cleanliness. Keep up the good work

The view of lagoon room was really amazing and must try once for everyone and in dining service is fast and delicious #amazing

Hotel ambience is good. The restaurant staff is supportive however the there is too much of delay in calling the housekeeping folks and they need to focus on the cleanliness as we saw cockroaches couple of times which was also shared with the the front desk ppl while checking out

staff are very polite. didn't charge any extra on 2 person they gave free breakfast💓

A wonderful stay, hospitality, arrangements, food & everything & each & every staff was good, well mannered well behaved

an experience fulfilled with fun ,relaxation and and foodilicious💖as family we all enjoyed and to the fullest ❤️

Acha hai coprevetiv staff hai acha laga mai acha discount mil jata hai book hi karna nyc

Rooms are awesome and so is the ambience. Great hospitality and courteous staff. Good enough options in breakfast as well.

Sahara is lime ho.e but this time m shocked to see there staff behaviour 😳 ,it was really bad ,I have shifted twice then to room was bad there was rooms available as I can see but they didn't give me ,I don't know what they got by doing this ,sad room ,sad service, I hope they maintain the same like b4 because v go there as it is sahara name

Plus:
location, view from hotel rooms negatives:
costly food the distance from the lift to the room is too much. This is a big hotel like a stadium with rooms all around in a circle facing inward and outward but there is only one elevator near the lobby which caters to all rooms. The business center even charged for two a4 print outs. The hotel is an old property and it reflects when you are in the room.

I had a comfortable stay with great location. The staff was friendly and the food was great. I will definitely go again when i visit mumbai

Rats are high of sweet room nd room are not comfortable no fruit in room no minibar bad work in room hotel people are not coprative

If anyone taking mercury lagoon facing, i must say that you are entering into a completely new world. There are plenty 5 star hotels. But trust me, these is different from all of those.

Overall ambience and experience is very good but inside the room, it can be better. Had to change the room. In the first room, curtains are not working and in the second room bathroom door is not proper. But overall it's ok.

Excellent hotel beautiful view, very close to domestic airport. Convenient. Excellent food buffet spread has variety of items from indian to continental

Bathroom fittings were not proper
they were broken

The taps in the bathroom were broken. The food was excessively costlier as compared to other similar properties.

nice hotel and ambience is very good 👍 nice stay nice hotel 🏨 and wonderful stay nice 😀 😊 👍 👌🏻 🙂 ☺️

My overall experience was ok in sahar stars. Only thing, i loved the restaurant space and ambience. Room maintenance is very poor. We could see the broken floor and wall. Room service is not upto the mark. Asked for strong masala tea. They served warm not even i can say warm. I went to the cafeteria and had my tea twice. I hope they will improve it.

Was denied check in on a mysterious hotel policy that patrons need to be above 21 years of age. No help offered by staff. Will never book a sahar property ever. Simply went to taj

Nice n happy, it was always fun to stay at this property. Center of mumbai, very near to airport service superb breakfast best

This has been an horrible experience. i booked a room in this property but this property is not even fit to be considered a safe hotel for staying.

It was excellent. Check in and check out was fast. Dinning options were also great. The only thing i felt was room was very far from lift, but its ok.

The rooms and washroom are not clean properly. 3 times i changed my room and still we had issues with cleanness. Rooms which was given to me was also not as per photos Service is not as per other 5 star property.

My experience was good night view was awesome best hotel for couples food was also good staff was also good

We felt that the room was small. It’s not worth the money we paid. The breakfast was very good

The excellent location, excellent amenities, services exceptional, food is the best. Mumbai can’t find food better than this in any other 5 star property

It’s very nice love the stay and-will be back soon. Service is also very great nice. Staff is very helpful

The interior of the property as per 5start or luxe was so avarge i found cockroache in my he bathroom. Usually in 5start category bathrobe and slippers etc are in placed before guest checkin however in this case i’ve to ask them twice to provide me the bathrobe further that bathrobe was also to sort and not sufficient enough rap around. Not shower gel was available. Overall very average property they should work on interior and service

The overall stay experience was quite good. Friendly security staff and corridor staff. Beautiful hotel

Check in was convenient so was check out. Rooms are ok but look old. No 5 star amenities or feel. Concierge staff are super helpful. Food & drink choices in hotel are limited and strictly no outside food allowed is very inconvenient. Its, forcing all guests to eat whatever available without chice.

Thanks sahar family for making my stay very comfortable. Would appreciate on th food as the taste of the same was incredible. I loved the food and ambience of the hotel. Thanks once again

The hotel rooms were nice but food was not at all good although we had opted for only complimentary breakfast. The food was cold, taste was also not upto the mark. Over all service is also not upto the mark there were no body to help us to take the luggage to the room. We have asked for plates and spoons but they have sent disposable plates and spoons.

Great experience. Amazing ambience and staff is highly professional. Facilities are also fantastic. Especially gym is well managed…

Rundown rooms. Uncourteous staff. Only good thing is the architecture of this hotel. Not at all vfm.

The front office staff uncooperative and untrained. Food was okn; rooms are good ; overrated price

My stay was very good and as usual i experienced very good hospitality, i will recommend my friends to stay here, hotels courtyard view is brilliant

Good for staying with family. Food is very costly since it is 5 star hotel. Enjoyed stay at there.

The hotel is one of the best and service is also very good. The hotel even though located in the centre of the city, gives you a feeling of being in a tropical forest.

Sahar star service is very bad experience for me whenever i call to reception from the room they never received my calls until my check out

Room is quite specious and service is also good. Breakfast is average. Overall, i had a great experience with the sahar star hotel. Staff was incredibly helpful, and the amenities were great. The room was wonderful, clean, and perfect to celebrate a birthday weekend.

The stay was pleasant. Hospitality was great and cooperative staff. We also got an upgrade on request. Food was also nice.

Very good hotel to stay after tiring day beds are comfortable service is very good the ws very courteous food selection is very wide

Room was different vis-a-vis photos. The roof was not transparent as shown in the photos. The balcony glass was dirty

Overall a nice experience, room furnishing are a bit old but the pool and general ambience of the hotel makes up for it

The staff was polite and cooperative, rooms were neat n clean, food was good.

The stay & hospitality of hotel staff was really good. Cafeteria & food was also excellent.

We booked a city view room and there was a wall in front blocking any view in front of the window, felt suffocating inside the closed room as it was closed in all directions. If can not fulfill commitments then why give option of a city virw?

Room had hair everywhere, stale breakfast. Worst customer service. Reception people not interested to work on the review.

Nice property ,good food ,room was awesome …stuff is very cooperative overall experience is good I’ll give 4 star .

Room as stated in makemytrip of 380 sq feet area is not true its was an average size room of 250 sq ft stay and hospitality was good breakfast was good but can increase some soups and continental menu to male it excellent

Nice ambient, with clean room. Only staff need more friendly. Breakfast have good number foods. Room was clean and big enough for 2 persons.

Very good service and staff is very helpful and very comparative 10 on 10 one of the best hotel in india

It is good hotel in mumbai to stay, walking distance from t1 good food and facility, over all it was a good experience stay at sahar star hotel

I came for check in they said wait for 15 min but i was waiting fir 2:30 hours no buddy contact me and when i have to go to the reception they we are waiting for you

The ambience rooms food all are up to the mark loved it even the basic rooms are so modern glass rooms have good city view

Beautiful hotel and very polite staff overall good but should improve breakfast spread it was very ordinary

It was an excellent experience at sahar star mumbai. Start from check in till check out. Breakfast was excellent and up to the mark. Had a wonderful time in our stay.

We were upgraded from a earth lagoon facing to a mercury lagoon facing room. The room and view both were excellent. Pool was good too. And they have a recreational room with carrom, chess, foos ball, air hockey n table tennis. What was disappointing was the breakfast buffet. Having been to a lot of five star properties, this one had limited options and very sad taste n quality. Ala carte was good.

Room is good with view but disappointed with bathroom. As bath tub is leaking and breakfast is also average as compare to other competitive 5star resturant with same price. Happy with the compelmentary cake as it was my wife birthday.

Once we saw the hotel and entered it, it was with full security and great ambience and tha crowd was also there it was very easy to find tha hotel we got a good room and in room dining was fabulous also there was very fast room service as compared to other hotels and the amenities were too good there were business centre and ther were manu activities also we had an great experience staying there and we got very good service too

Very good hitech look, very good professional service, very neat and clean spacious rooms. City view and balcony view are very enjoyable

Regardless of the efforts from the staff to keep it functional. The management and the marketing and sales team need to be vary of their product and quality of the experience. The only response for every nonsense was that we are fully booked. There was leakage every place. Fridge doesn't work. The automatic curtains broken.

Shady place with no focus on customer experience. Exorbitantly expensive in room dining not worth the place

We have booked venus premier room which is open sky rooftop. Any one can book for there special occasion like anniversary or birthday also it will make your day awesome definitely. Also loved breakfast with tropical view. Service is also prompt with decent staff behaviour.

Rooms, bathrooms, restaurent, lobby all were very perfect. Ambience was very fresh and soothing. Our rooms bathroom was fantastic

The hotel is good and rooms are ok as per the 5 star tag they need to include more complimentary stuff such as complimentary drinks were not provided. Food at the restaurants was excellent. But the buffet food quality should have been better.

It was good, neat and clean, staff was courteous, room was decent in size. But there was no view from our room we chose the best catagory also it was an inter connected room with different room numbers. When the door bell rung it was for both the rooms which was very frustrating. Hotel is closed so felt bit suffocated. Also the pool was closed. Salon was closed. Theatre was only meant for premiers or bulk booking. Inhouse guest were not allowed to enter.

While my overall stay was enjoyable, i couldn't help but notice that it didn't quite measure up to my previous experience. The primary factor contributing to this discrepancy was the condition of the rooms on the second floor, which appeared dated and less satisfactory compared to those located on higher floors. On a positive note, the check-in and checkout process was extremely smooth and deserving of praise.

The hotel breakfast is the worst i have had in my 30 years. They didnt have any variety. It was tasteless. Stale and they didnt allow early checkin even when they had rooms. Avoid this hotel please.

It was excellent experience staying in Sahara star, it is different from other star hotels especially inner circle … But quality of food was not so good

A room facing the side garden and terrace was booked where as they upgraded us to a suite which did not have this view but instead a horrible-looking view. The hotel was oversold and they allotted our room to some other guest. Although they allotted a suite and the suite was only space but nothing great about it The staff as far as the hotel was concerned especially the front office staff where not at all friendly. It seems they were not trained to work under lot of pressure. It was a bad experience to book to sahar star.

Good hotel nearby locate r to terminal 01 mumbai domestic airport courteous staff. Over all good service

Location, stay and food all are great. Liked the hospitality of the staff. Worth staying in sahar star

Great location, really pleasant and clean rooms, but the thing that makes this such a good place to stay are the staff. All of the people are incredibly helpful and generous with their time and advice.

Sahar star is the only hotel i would like to recommend to all my friends who came from outstation, sahar is one the best i had ever seen in mumbai

Mm t was very helpful with me and sahar is a great choice to stay always. The staff is very polite, breakfast was good. Ambience was perfect.

Worst place ever. No cleanliness in a hotel or rooms. Felt like i was in a 5star slum. Smelt bad. Welcome was very well. Food was good. Could do better with a upgrade

Shower in the bathroom broke down, no one came to fix. the rooms were very dimly lit, there was no scope to increase brightness. STAFF WAS DAMN CARELESS, called them to enquire about room service menu v/s restaurants options to which they said go to 00 floor and figure out yourself. Wasim at the reception had some personal biases, allotted me a room towards the fag end of the 4th floor which clearly had a walk over 400-500mts. from the lift!

No room service no food rooms were unclean

It’s good property to stay, rooms are good and spacious with all latest amenities, hotel ambiance is also good, services are excellent, front office quite quick in check in check out process

Stay, staff and property everything was excellent lively ambiance with many choice of restaurants thanks to team sahar

Sahar star property is really very good. The house keeping does maintain ance extremely good
clean and hygienic sheets and towels. Very easy from airport

Good n beautiful room. Smooth checking n checkout. Good people to deal with. Location is also good. Abundantly varied cuisine.

Very bad experience staff is rude service is poor

I it was a fantastic beautiful awesome hotel and my son me enjoyed staying here it was a five star cruise experience loved it

nice hotal in Mumbai at location in good sarvice our mengment Sahara 🇪🇭 is the best hotal .next visit just

It’s beautiful hotel just near by mumbai airport, rooms are like heaven on earth i just loved to stay.

I was overwhelmed with your service and had a pleasant stay. Would also recommend others to have their stay at hotel.

Breakfast buffet was huge. Taste was very good. We ordered chicken biryani taste was ok. They are strict towards outside food which i think is a negative for me because there number of food joints in mumbai that serve delicacy but this hotel doesn’t allow. Other five star hotels like taj and trident allow that but they don’t.

It’s a good property for business travels. Also quality of the hr food is good. Closer to the airport makes it better option

The building may confuse you for a ufo. But the hospitality was great. Excellent checkin experience. Good good at casablanca and great location in the mumbai melee.

Location is great but staff is not accommodating to the requests of the guests unless they have booked the entire hotel for a wedding.

Good service. Fast check in and check out. Good experience. Location near airport quite convenient.

Very nice experience to live in. Staff were friendly, hotel was clean, food was also nice. It is a great choice for staying near airport.

Excellent stay. Good service
excellent location. .

Great experience, all thing very well, from reception, room, amenities, etc. All thing is no. 1. Best hotel

Good facilities and very good experience in the room view best place to visit must visit hdld dhldndbsmsk

It is well connected to all the places, staff is not cooperative, room maintenance is poor with old fit outs

room is owsome food olso good nice ambiyanse gret holiday …. staff is very polite only one complen ac is not working properly

Every thing is up to mark in sahar except the reception staff who thinks they own the hotel and are rulers and dictators. The way they speak and command is terrible and horrifying. In a five star property, any one comes for convenience and comfort and not to be govern by stupid things in the name of different hotels have different rules. I had a really bad experience with the check in staff. The hotel is. Not right for family and friends travel for lieusure and just for business visit as is located well near airport centrally

The glass roof should have been transparent, but it was opaque, so what's the point of such open to sky rooms. The property is good, but the rooms are not. Didn't feel like a 5 star hotel and below average rooms. Don't ever go for venues premier room, not worth it. Breakfast is also average.

No complains. Superb venue, location very convenient as it is just besides the airport, excellent food options in various cuisines, full cooperative, staff, neat and clean, full parking facility available, easy access to rooms

Easy check in check out, good hospitality, humble staffs, breakfast was good. Overall, i had an amazing experience here.

Not at all lyk and rate very high as compare to otehr 5star property and toke money before check out

Great food & great experience, staff was also good, we enjoy our trip to stay in hotel, ambience of garden was different

Lovely hotel few minutes walk from domestic air port terminal 1. Its a 5 star deluxe with all amenities, many resturants, lovely ambience, with excellent break fast spread.

It is a bit expensive but best things come at a cost. The rooms are well maintained and restaurants are fantastic

Whenever u book this property think and book. The staffs are well behaved but the services are very very poor. food menu at room service is very limited. the in room dining services are extremely poor then one can expect to be. the food is contaminated. cost cutting is done by the hotel in each step like the lobby ac is slow, the lobby from room to lift has no ac. the rooms are not well maintained. there is no one to hear your complaints room dining charges is very very high then any other hotels in India. the check-in & check out process is slow due to low staffs.extremely bad experience.u will feel like staying in a 3 star property but paying 5 star prices.

Whenever u book this property think and book. The staffs are well behaved but the services are very very poor. food menu at room service is very limited. the in room dining services are extremely poor then one can expect to be. the food is contaminated. cost cutting is done by the hotel in each step like the lobby ac is slow, the lobby from room to lift has no ac. the rooms are not well maintained. there is no one to hear your complaints in room dining charges is very very high then any other hotels in India. the check-in & check out process is slow due to low staffs. extremely bad experience.u will feel like staying in a 3 star property but paying 5 star prices.

Whenever u book this property think and book. The staffs are well behaved but the services are very very poor.food menu at room service is very limited.the in room dining services are extremely poor then one can expect to be.the food is contaminated.cost cutting is done by the hotel in each step like the lobby ac is slow ,the lobby from room to lift has no ac.the rooms are not well maintained.there is no one to hear your complaints in room dining charges is very very high then any other hotels in india.the check-in & check out process is slow due to low staffs. extremely bad experience.u will feel like staying in a 3 star property but paying 5 star prices.

First issue
it was our anniversary and we decided to spend it in sahar star venues room under the sky since as per the photos shared , the glass roof should have been transparent through which we could enjoy sleeping under the stars, but that was not the case, the glass was opaque and we were stuck inside a room where there was no other window to look outside or for ventilation. We requested the hotel staff to provide us another room since we did not want to spend it in such a room but the 350 rooms hotel was completely sold out on a weekday, so they could not do anything for us. Second issue
we had our 4 month old baby with us and to our surprise, we were greeted with many mosquitos in the room. We contacted the front desk and they immediately sent a mosquito bat, we were able to get rid of 1 or 2 using it, but couldn't do this the whole night since there were many of them and one mosquito also bit our baby, so we couldn't stay anymore and we checked out of the hotel at 2am. In all, our experience was not good at all on our special day. I have already requested mm t to grant me a full refund of my stay because they completely spoil t my day after taking (this is a lot of money for 1 night, so spend carefully. Above 2 issues aside, i have no complaints on the property - the property is beautiful, the rooms (except venus) are very good with interior lagoon facing balconies, food was good, the staff service was prompt. Only the mosquito issue and venues room spoil t the whole experience for us and we were completely let down. Hope sahar star takes a note of this and carries our fumigation and sanitisation in all their rooms.

hotel room was good. bad was comfy and awesome view from balcony. stay was good but staff was not good on check out time. we told them our check out time at call after they come at room and belling every 15 min for check out and also don’t go in pub they are very tricky in oders and make oder on there own after come to check we noticed we oders some different think and they surved us different it make our bill up to 1000 on 2 drinks so pub experience is not good for there but room wash good sleep was so good there😊

They had terrible service. And i was disappointed at how irresponsible the staff was. Had to call 4 times min for bottle of shampoo.

Stay was good and services were also upto the mark but some unusual guidelines like no entry of guest after 9 am and pm is very inconvenient. My cousin brother was not allowed to come to room at 9. 35 pm. This i found very unusual and unlike any other 5 star property in mumbai and across country

Everywhere cigarette and alcohol smell. Worst experience. Room was neat but smelling because of the cigarette. Even at libby level, i had to meet someone, where we were uncomfortable

Have stayed here before also, as usual great ambience n hospitality. Loved the food and staff, always helpfull, one of the best location and great room service

Awesome room service
excellent food Quality
Good Staff behavior
Best quality Stay
Best Best Best Good Good Good
excellent Excellent Excellent💯

I stayed here for two days. The breakfast was very good. The service in room, as well as in the restaurant is appreciable.

It was a wonderful experience staying at sahara. This is the second time i stayed but the experience is yet awesome. The staff, food, rooms are just commendable. Loved the stay!

Dome shaped only pillarless hotel in the world. The best experience as usual. Location at the airport is plus featre

Good ambience
good staff
good rooms
good service
good food only problem slow wifi overall i had an excellent stay

Stayed here for business, we always having good experience in this hotel, dinner in namak resturant amazing

Stay is average for this hitel. No cleanliness in rooms, washrooms are in bad conditions and no visibility to outside

My stay at sahar star was very pleasant. Staff were also supportive. I had requested for a late check-out which was humbly accepted by the hotel.

nice stay good food .. very nice ambiance ….interior is awsome ,,, dal khichri is amezing never eit before service is very good staff is humble

They have amazing in room and dine-in services with an breathe taking ambiance. The property location is near to t1

Front desk is very cooperative specially mr tiwari nice restaurant breakfast buffet is good smooth

Very good property with all luxuries combined with excellent service and staff. Very prompt in each and everything and ready to customise as per individual needs.

It was nice staying in hotel, good hygienic rooms, good restaurants with mutiple choice in breakfast

The room was good but the services was poor. There were mosquitoes, iron was broken, the speaker’a cable was broken. The lift from the room was like 500 mtrs, limited menu. The pool area seems to be like 3 star standard. Radisson’s breakfast is much better than sahara, very few option just like booked fab hotel.

Delicious dinner n breakfast. Neat n clean property. With good helping staff n comfortable stay, good room interiors n comfortable bed and view from balcony and grand reception with fast working receptionist nice enjoyed stay

Stay was good, room was good

Itvwas great stay in sahara, me and my family and friends enjoyed a lot. And special thanks to make my trip forgiving a cheaper rate then other companies.

All gone in vain stay was not good guest for whom we booked where terrified with service and noise running out of the hotel lobby.

All the arrangements including room upgrade breakfast and dining services were good very friendly and courteous staff would highly recommend to friends

Horrible hospitality and even worse food quality. Nothing that can be of even a single star standard. The restaurant staff is absolutely clueless about the very word hospitality & courteousness. The food quality is bad (especially the buffet breakfast. The rooms are old and in bad condition. I guess there is no ownership in running the hotel professionally. God save sahar and make it a true star.

The experience of staying at this hotel was unpleasant. Aside from the rooms, the entire exterior of the property was extremely hot during the summer. The lobby and outside area stank. In addition, although they expected us to check out of our rooms at a precise 11:00 am, we were given our rooms at 4:30 pm for check-in. We asked for a late checkout, but it was not taken into account. Overall i will say there are really good options of hotel in mumbai and near airport also.

Thank you for your hospitality, had a great time, service was prompt, however team could have accommodated our request for lagoona view

For such a huge dome hotel there is lift only in one corner. At-least they need to have lifts in 4 corners. People will be tired of walking to reach their rooms

Value for money, good ambience, airport and city convenience, not so good staff knowledge and behaviour

I booked vinus room but at time time check in they offer some other room which is very uncomfortable for me

Great property, great location, nice pool, lavish f&b selections, must stay property in and around airport

Neat and clean rooms with amazing food options and other amenities. Best part is that this property is right next to airport with just a 4 min walk and with loads of greenery inside the building.

Morning breakfast was not up to mark.

Rooms 4083, 87, 89, 77, 85 all r suffocating. Breakfast lay out pathetically small and service of live counters too slow and time consuming. Our morning was spoiled due to it

Excellent location, great hospitality, lavish breakfast swimming pool with jacuzzi and waterfall type flow, but i couldn’t find my l misplaced clothes at the pool

The best in mumbai and staying here regularly for 15 years and each visit is awesome. Few extras and additional facilities are reduced compare to few years back including breakfast varieties. Still my first choice in mumbai is sahar the great star

I am stay lots of time it's very nice hotel

Before i visit this hotel have good staff
but responce is late breakfast is also not get full compare to menu

It was wonderful experience thank you

Excellent services, mesmerizing views and wonderful food. That's all about sahar star

Nice hotel and ambience overall good sstay

I was on a weekend get away at sahara star the stay was brilliant and as expected only place that iched my experience was the delayed and slow service at the breakfast i have been to multiple 5 star properties in indian and abroad but this was extremely disappointing and neither was the breakfast upto mark as per the costing

Amazing stay, service and good food.

Property is very good. Condition of property is tremendous.

The staff and the hospitality service is very good

THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED ADJACENT TO AIRPORT AND IS UNIQUE BEAUTIFUL STRUCTURE

Last minute staycations in mumbai works the best due to our work schedule. Stay and offers of sahar star has has been by far the best experience for us. We got an upgrade to a higher room category on check in. The dinner buffet at the earth plate restaurant has a been value for money. The food quality, service, the wide spread food options all together is a must try when in the city! the ambience and interior of the hotel are class apart! the overall feeling of the stay is a single word is grand ! look forward to visit here soon!

nice property?, only food price little high

Stayed here for the first time and it was very comfortable

Nothing to talk about as the food is priced too much and there was nothing unique about the cuisine to substantiate the cost there are so many options for dinning in Mumbai which we chose to splurge and pamper ourselves

Property is amazing ,common place is well maintained ,night view of hotel is simply wow,but Staff were horrible ,Receptionist don't even care for u .The time I went for lunch it was 2.35 noon ,Manager told me sorry we dnt allow now for buffet ,where buffet closes at such time .Thumbs down for so called 5 star hotel where building r good but staff r arrogant.

Great ambiance. Good food. Nice staff

The hotel is well located near there domestic airport the property is huge and well maintained. The rooms are large and spacious with food quality aminities. Breakfast spread is good and the food quality is good

Awesome experience the night view is best pool is huge n good

Good hotel comfortable stay

Right from the amenities, the food ,the staff …all at there awesome best

The location was good as it was near the airport. The breakfast buffet was very limited and cold. The amneties were good but air conditioning of the room was very slow

The food at sahar star was simply amazing. The buffet spread was superb.

The staff of this hotel very arrogant

Sahar star always provides a wonderful stay experience while in mumbai and i was also given a free room upgrade by the hotel staff. Thanks again

It was good but service can be improved

Very poorly maintained and marvelous property; in current situation it is only worth to experience architecture and lagoon once. Stinky lobby, dirty room and very very over price food. Will recommend to try elsewhere

There was nothing wrong with my stay as such but thete was neither anything that stood out as great. The room signage was confusing. I had to call the reception to know which way to walk ( 5063 ) as the signs were not logical. The usb port in the desk panel eas not functioning. The breakfast spread was average - though the baked items like croissant were below par. All in all an average stay.

They stay was really pleasant. The way the hotel is designed it’s a very pleasant atmosphere inside the hotel.

Room is very good, service is good, but out sod food not allowed in hotel bad rules for vegetarians

3

I came from hyd to mumbai i couldn’t get a hotel which is near to the airport and later i saw the pictures of this hotel i and i booked it for 1 day and it was a great stay i checked out late and for exceptional they gave us complimentary time to checkout and the view of the of is absolutely fascinating from inside can’t tell about city view!

hotel property is good but room service is not good if we need any thing from house keeping we have to wait minimum 20 minutes also bad experience at the time of breakfast no body is bodher to take care of guest. now already check out few minutes before

The fresh & green interiors are soul soothing. Comfortable stay, clean & hygienic rooms, warm hospitality, nice location.

This hotel is just one of its type. Perfect place to stay. Ambience too good.

The room was not worth the money i paid.

Wonderfully and shandar excellent

The ac was terrible in room. So much hot. The phone was not working. It took ages to bring ice. Making good looking room is not enough. Decoration is ok but main is service

Met-ting the lord jesus christ a

it was a excellent stay in sahara star very good experience over all and because of the make my trip it made the trip more convenient..

Though we have stayed for a very short period of time which indeed was extremely pleasant and relaxing. From quality stay to the lavishly spreaded Breakfast including the hotel staff politeness everything was top notch. Really cherishing and enoyable stay😍.

We had a very comfortable stay. Food was good and all staff members were very polite and helpful. Looking forward to visit again.

Very clean, convenient near to airport

A hotel located in the nearest proximity to the airport is full of all possible comfort and pleasure. This hotel is very suitable for holiday, pleasure or business travellers. Food is unparallel, staff is extremely cooperative and beautiful environment.

Extremely happy with the overall experience at sahar star for my daughter’s wedding reception. The rooms were excellent with great service and the best part was the food which was loved by all the guests

It was a wonderful & amazing experience staying at sahar star hotel. They upgraded my room as the room i booked got some technical error in curtains. It was yummy & with lot of spread breakfast. Makemytrip booking experience was amazing & very easy.

Beautiful property, fantastic hospitality

I was trying to reach hotel on there telephone no but get no response and also when i visited for check in that time no one is guide me about watt to room also they didn’t not ask about the water when inter roon there is lot of dust in tea mug and kettle guest can’t expect from bran like sahara

i love this beautiful property hotel sahara star ⭐️ one of my favourite places in the mumbai , great hospitality and services by here of staff and welcome 🙏🏻 i want to suggest plz when u come to mumbai you should be come here and stay and also take food 🍱

Location is fantastic is you have to catch a flight. Also very near to juhu beach. Food is good. Rooms are bit small but comfortable.

It was very amazing stay good ambeince and good staff

Good food, arrangements, people are on a call away, clean, no sound - so peaceful sleep.

The property is beautiful & hospitality is great

Have stayed there so much. Mercury rooms are smaller. Sometimes the toiletries are not fully packed

It was a 1 day stay, strangely for a hotel which claims to be in the top notch there was no greet by the front desk, neither did the person brief about the hotel, the about the restaurant or for that matter breakfast timings or anything else. Upkeep of the room left a lot to ask.

what a facilieties ......🤩🤩 happy to come here again and again whenever i come in mumbai

Awesome expeiance good food interior is very very good staff is very nice,

Overall stay was amazing, the stay was also really good, the pool staff was also good. The breakfast in the morning was too god, and had plenty of options too.

It was soo good staying and the discount offered by makemytrip 🤝 is amazing

Beautiful, unique. Comfortable.

It's a very lively environment while entering the lobby and much different from conventional five star hotels. Location is very close to airports. However the rooms are smaller and very low height. Checkin was very good

Excellent brilliant mind blowing

great hospitality best staff and great location best place worth money

Nice ambiance. Good staff. Indoor plants are the best

Had to wait a long for check in & room service was poor

The room i booked was based on misinformation that one can have rooftop glass ceiling and the sky is visible however and actual room condition was beyond pathetic, the staff showed 3 different venues premium rooms and all of their roof glass ceiling was broken right above the bed. Its massive negligence from hotel staff that they don't care about safety and protection of their guests ideally they should shut down the top floor and first fix all the broken things before putting up for guests stay. Worst was the receptionist who was completely indifferent to the fact that the ceilings were broken and duty manager had zero intervention. There were many staff simply standing there gossiping among each other but no really bothered to do anything about as if they didn't care. Absolutely horrific and insulting hotel experience with horrible staff. Worst hotel

Property is at good location next to airport. Nothing special, you can find much better property in this rate

Great experience amazing property

Service and food good. Happy about the service

The hotel is amazing, great food, amazing hospitality

Great hotel with superb amenities. Lovely staying here it’s nearby domestic airport & food is excellent

Costly and not upto mark. Breakfast spread not as compared to 5star property

Overall it was smooth and comfortable stay.

The room had a pungent smell. The bed linens were not soft.

The stay was comfortable and property was one of the best property i have visited till now. Food was fabulous and overall service was great.

Non cooperative staff, misguided us, we booked a hight category room with higher amount but they tried to give us standard room with dirty and horrible condition. Thanks to make-my trip team who helped us in such a panic situation

The hotel is run down and needs renovation. Rooms are very ordinary. The corridor carpet smells and also the room layout, glass door of the balcony which is see through. Lots of changes required

Excellent

Unhygienic washroom and bedroom. Overrated food. Very mediocre.

The stay was really v wry amazing good vibes and a very pleasant stay

Food quality is excellent and quality is good

Room and the ambinace was totally good, but should have other counter open in the reception as they made to wait 10 mins as only on person was opertaing n rest all other counters were empty with staff standing in the corner and gossping

Very near to mumbai airport near hygiene clean safety

Good to stay money value property

Nice property very good cooperative staff

Good steay but not good tea in breakfast

Cooperative staff airport staff

Awasm experience good hygnic five star property staffs are cooperative

Overall experience is good. Staffs are helpful and view from rooms are awesome.

The greenery was very well maintained inside the hotel and rooms are also good. Staff service and behaviour was not good.

the hotel well located and the amnesties are excellent, but the facility need a renovation though however I like and enjoy the stay, the staff are very polite and respectful
i recommend this hotel

We had amazing stay at sahar star ; right from checkin everything was so sophisticated and perfect, stay was amazing with perfect room and then the amenities, breakfast spread everything was just perfect and had out of world experience. Thanks team mmt for booking.

Its really great experience to stay in sahar star. Design was amazing, food also excellent, location is good, due to airport noise of plane is there. Rest all are perfect. All staff and attendees are cooperative. Interior of hotel is really fantastic.

Good stey good lobe and promises

It was overall an excellent stay. The staff were very courteous and accommodating. The breakfast was good

good service, small room, staff behaviour very nice, average food but very costly.
to sum up price a bit high, need few improvement

Hotel is very beautiful l quite spacious lobby, food is also very good. The staff is very professional, there is something for everyone. I enjoyed a lot.

Good place to stay and enjoy.

No person to accompany the luggage. I didn't like the attitude of the reception area. The room was not clean as per 5 star status. Would not recommend staying there again.

given room is very small, infact that was not the room. they have just managed by fixing the bed in the area.

Had a good stay with well kept room.

Terrible people. Terrible app. Idiots. Only do repetitive messages

Awesome property and delicious food

The staff was not at all cooperative.

Good hotel with very good services

The interior of hotel is amazing and room was so clean and comfortable.

First they game a twin bedded room meant for handicap persons. I tried calling the front desk but couldn’t connect. Again i had to walk down in person and got the room changed. The iron pad was not in good condition also the toilets had stains. There was water leakage from the iron in the room. Summary: need to improve on housekeeping and service

We have requeste department to print page. Department charge single print 35+gst it's terrible

Near airport very convenient and 5 star hotel with budget rates

Room location was very bad. Tv not working in room. There is a severage problem in washroom. Terrible experience. Flouting washroom

First of all the location was within the airport. and it was so very convenient for me coz I had to catch the flight from terminal 1 . Then the staff at reception were so very polite and friendly that I cannot explain in words . I really felt so good to book this hotel. Then one of their staff accompanied me to my room which was on 4 th floor . Now comes to service.. I was really surprised when I saw the hotel was full loaded but there was no quos in the room service. I called for house keeping after my shower . The house keeping came within in minutes . Then I went to the restaurant named lagoon . Superb service plus soft spoken staff 👌🏻impressive ambience and lovely atmosphere. Lastly the breakfast was next level also the friendly staff and everything I can’t express in words . Thanks to make my trip for making my day !!!

Location was too good staff were also very friendly & food was excellent

Clean. Courteous staff. Elaborate breakfast. Well maintained.

Slow checkin process
rooms are very dark with very less light. Water pressure is not controlled meaning if you open the tap to 100% you will end up running your cloths. Rusty window and mirror hairdryer from 90's
breakfast was average. No airport pick up or drop service. Will not recommend to any one

The stay was excellent. Rooms and food at buffet were good. Checkin counter person jay was brilliant. Our overall experience was good. Elderly parents were made comfortable. Hotel provided cake for our daughter’s birthday celebration. We enjoyed our stay thoroughly. We will visit this hotel for stay again. Regards

My fave place. Always all good just that the prices have sky rocketed this time

It was awesome rooms were real good n comfortable

The service from checkin to checkout was superb highly recommended for families and work people to have a splendid 5 star experience. Great service at every step
and location is very nice

We stayed there to celebrate my daughter's birthday. I n my family members enjoyed to the fullest. Great ambiance n the view from our room was stupendous.

Order chicken biryani and to my shock there was a feather in the biryani. This was immediately pointed out and the supervisor mr. Naik was quick to replace the biryani plus gave back the full price paid. Hotel needs to careful in order to avoid health hazard. Every time it’s not about money.

a true luxurious experience with high end accommodation which was the most glamorous hospitality in the world! thank you🙏

It was a beautiful and v relaxing stay. Beautiful and well maintained property. All bar and dining are awesome. Services r excellent. Pool of property is soon amazing. Very relaxing and joyful trip.

Good

Its so royall.

Food portion was poor as compared to lalit or taj

Very nice and safety stay and hospitality

I had called the hotel and booked a pickup at the airport. I was waiting there for half an hour but nobody cared to come. Didn’t even receive a phone call. When i complained at the reception they had no answer to it. Pathetic pathetic service. No

. It's was over a great experience and majn the staff is very good

Love to live this hotel. Next time definitely i stay here again🤩

Availablity of rooms is comfortable and balcony view is awesome. From room washroom is also good for freshing

I have book with. Breakfast but at the time of breakfast they don’t have provided proper service i order for egg but i didn’t get more than 25 min i am waiting for that

Very bad suit room i don’t like not sweet room li m very very upset i’ll pay and this suit room very bad experians

Third class hotel i ever seen it became ugly waste of money

Felt like home very good staff food quality also superb

Quite place, good well trained staff, very well trained, excellent property, but expensive

Stayed overnight for flight change. Chose the hotel due to proximity to airport. Very unusual experience, sleep disturbed due to mosquito bites, saw two mosquitoes flying. Rooms insufficiently lit and not very clean. Informed manager about mosquitoes.

Good very good to spend time to stay

As per room the prices were too high.

Ambience is just amazing. Hospitality was fantastic

5.

Location is very central and ideal if you have late night flights - domestic or international.
buffet breakfast is very good with a large spread

5

We stayed in indore we reviewed it but didn't got discount or any benefits or reward points or anything but over all stay was nice hut food quality was not so much good

amazing ambience and property, the stray is luxurious and confortable

Marvelous experience, excellent and well care staffed

Best hotel of mumbai best food

The hotel is old and needs upgrade. The service is good and pleasant. The food is satisfactory

Very clean and good food service

Excellent service with best location.

I have been to more than 23 countries, but never experienced this type of reception. Hotel staff did not allowed us to even wait i side hotel as we reached 2 hours prior. Even after knowing i am with my wife rooms got only one cup, no coffee pouch, no sugar pouch. There is no mini bar in the room. The refrigerator did not have any cold water. Even there is no complementary drinks and fruits in the room. I have spent rs. 17k per night. It's reception is just as ordinary as hotels around cst. Very sad.

Sahar star is brilliant and practical but the touch of luxury is definitely missing. The rooms lack the luxury factory due ro which it doesn't feel premium. The rooms are also very small

Ambience, room, food, service everything is too good

Literally from telephone booking review staff to front desk check out staff is plain arrogant and misbehaves a a drop of a hat. 2 star hotels have better trained staff than sahar star. Breakfast menu and spread is superb but the serving staff is just stressed and impatient want to see you out of there asap!
5 star hotel. 1 star service. Fullstop.

Best on service plus food and the lagoon view is very amazing

Staff was not polite. Property was beautiful. Need to maim

Best food, good ambience, silent environment, concierge service was great and really affordable.

Location of property was good but staff was not that upto the mark in dealing

Nice property. They gave me upgrade

It’s always been pleasure to stay at this beautiful property

Luxurious stay with unique experience of lagoon. Next to domestic airport and near to international flights

Stay was good, cleanliness of the hotel is excellent. But food is of poor quality and very expensive

Celebrated daughter's b'day. Great hospitality by hotel staff

Property was good, staff was very good. Food was good but hygiene was not there. Suprise being a 5 star property no hygiene measures were taken

Nice service done by hotel. Will go again. As i got the chance

The access to our rooms been denied several times due to your poor maintenance of the door locks system ans caused irreparable loss of time and caused inconvenience in midnight and several times during stay. Pols acknowledge the above given feedback

Stay was not as i think. Room are also not cleaned and not refreshing. Because that stay was not good. I m an frequent user of make my trip want some better deal next time

Great stay. Look forward for more.

Food was good and testy but expensive.

Near by airport good food good stay

I stayed in sahar star mumbai for one night on 22nd august 2022.

Super hotel as i have stayed in so many hotel but this hotel looks different thanks

We had a wonderful stay at sahar star. The rooms were comfortable and the staff was very polite.

The venus room is extremely spacious. Overall my stay was excellent. But i am just rating 1 start less due to some maintenance issue

Nice food stay and location near by airport

Best location clean rooms with good staff

Amazing vibe at the hotel. Very near to airport. Perfect stay

Confortable, clean on time check in and check out. Friendly staff

Food alcohol very expensive we ordered chicken sukha the dish of the day was very sad worst you cannot carry your own bottle of wine

Jordar jabardast mast mast life

Very nice trip experience at this place

I have very good experience

Too good hospitality and ambience of the hotel. The staff is too good also very quick.

Very nice looking and service location is very important

Excellent services and amazing work

Add one more lift because everything is gud only problem is a lift

It's was something different & an awesome place along with nice restaurants

Had great time. Location is just near to both international and domestic airport. Breakfast is very good. Serves everything what you can wish in breakfast. Amazing stay.

Food is good specially the brealfast is superb

Good staf/food/ and both services are best

I called 5 time for powder milk towel and 2 cups and i got after 45 minutes that also coffee not powder milk and towel after scolding them and after that also i didn’t got cups

Nice to stay also value for money

Reception very good, next week your hotel ramjan pathana here

Firstly even after making the booking before hand they denied entry saying they have sold out, though they manage to give the room later. The room was ok, there was a power trip too

The stay was very good. Even though it’s not first time i liked the device as usual

I have stayed there for one day. Hotel is just awesome

Spend two nights the experience was lovely. Few things were missing in my room according to the descriptions but wen i asked about it they arranged it overall happy.

Love the food, ambience, different types of cultures and food cuisine.

Just go with the reviews, excellent property with good ambience, food, rooms, staff and services everything was perfect.

I m satisfied with the service all members of the hotel. Definitely will recommend in future

Overall a pleasant stay. Arooms were spacious clean. Service was very good. Food quality was also good

Excellent ambience, food was awesome

nice staff v good room breackfast v 👌

We loved our stay at sahar star hotel, it's an amazing property with beautiful ambience.

The stay here was amazing, great service, cooperative staff, very well maintained property and the food over here was fresh & hygiene

Breakfast was not at all good .. no service persons to attend as we were sitting attend .. none of item was good in taste .. dosa counter was for name sake . In cheese dosa only little cheese for name sake over all breakfast 2 out of 5 rating

One of the best properties in mumbai. Had a really good time. The food was delicious and the stay was luxurious and comfortable. Sahar star crew members made sure we experience the best hospitality. Definitely will book the same hotel whenever i visit mumbai again.

Room was hygienic
staff was always polite gave us really good service thoroughly enjoyed our stay

Very close to airports - great spread of breakfast-pan asian food is fabulous

Nice location. Best management

Hotel bathrooms are not in good condition. They are old and not well maintained. With the price they charging, its not worth of 5 star category.

Excellent hotel. Excellent staff. Excellent amenities & rooms. The area outside the hotel where arrive in our vehicle can be a bit better managed. Everything else is just top notch.

Excellent experience nice service

Good ambiance. Good foods. Great view specially from the courtyard. Staffs are very nice and helpful. It was a great stay.

This hotel are amazing and what a view of hotel thank u for giving service

While we were sleeping around 4:30 am suddenly the ceiling at the entrance of the room fell off. After which we hd to change our room. Luckily no one was standing below that area where the ceiling fell off.

Excellent service and property is just great

Simply superb, food services, gardens, rooms, view. Enjoying a lot

service is super , food is good 👍

Poor hospitality, average food, horrible contact less key, in 2 night stay required 8 to 10 to activated and at reception key complain was too common, in mumbai so many other 5 star to spend money.

Hotel sahar star is really a great place to stay, it really means five star property with luxury and best hospitality. I would recommend everyone to at-least stay once, great views from hotel balcony

Excellent property n staff was so cooperative n food was also excellent

Glorious hotel, near to airport and juhu

Fantastic very good food and nice atmosphere

This hotel looking very excellent and service all wow good

The rooms are awesome and enjoyed the stay though it's business trip but never feel out of home. The breakfast was delicious with lot of options.

Had an amazing experience at the hotel, ambience and everything was very good

Great place to stay especially near to the airport, good spacious rooms. Food expensive but not great. Better options available

Location advantage very close to terminal 1 airport, extra large breakfast buffet, rooms are comfortable

Excellent the grateful hospitality

Food was not worth to price particularly in room dinning service was not that good. Better keep an eye in service and food. Can improve maintenance aswell.

Good property. Nice service

Awesome experience ! and food is too good

Great stay! beautiful room! amazing view

It was a great pleasent and safe stay, food was also delicious, i recommend this property as per my experience

This property is the world best

Good supper cool nice looking good

Good hotel excellent maintenance good food friendly staff

I stayed here for a week. Mercury king room with city view. It is magical during monsoons, just when the rain flows and creates a waterfall effect. Rooms are luxurious as compared to trident (nariman point. Breakfast is amazing.

Location very convenient, near to airport, food & hygiene were top of the world

In all it was a splendid stay. Enjoyed the courtyard view and the food.

You only get WiFi with 2 mbps speed. Can get 8 mbps by paying another 800 rupee.

Nice structure good ambiance but food is very expensive not worth the tatse

We got delayed due rain and repented for late check in as we missed the luxury of staying in the as per afternoon check in. We request for late checkout next got time till 2 pm thanks to front office team, want to visit again and stay at least couple of days.

Love the experience and room lagoon it was amazing thanks for making my loved one day special

We reasonably travel-led all over india and stayed at many 5 star properties. But the ambience here is awesome, especially a view from the lagoon side room was very good. Would love to visit again and recommend others to must visit once to this property.

Enjoyed the property n experience was good for couple stay

Location is very good and near the airport, fantastic property and interior, good food

One thing that stands out in this hotel is the view from balconies. It’s just beautiful. Coming to rooms, they are ok. Little dated, but ok.

Excellent stay. Pl keep it up. Polite staff and excellent service

Have never felt this disappointed with my stay at a hotel than this. The bathroom showers were not working which were not repaired till the end of my trip. I wanted to extend my stay for one more day at the hotel, the front office staff said they cannot extend it as it is done even though i asked to make a new checkin for me, on top of that had a very nasty experience at the coffee shop of the hotel, were as soon as i sat the staff started chasing me for making an order within a minute or was asked to vacate the place even though the place was empty and i was a staying guest plus i was ordering if they would had just given me minute to breathe. Did not expect such kind of service from sahar star. Never ever going to come and stay back at this hotel.

D service is very slow. And in room flush not working

It was a pleasant stay and i enjoyed my trip through make my trip app

Very nice stay and staff. .

The hotel is strategically located near terminal 1 and the property is good but it’s quite old and needs a revamp the staff is quite courteous

The best stay n best ambiance

Was a very unique and lavish experience. Out of the world.

Walkable distance from t1, food is so yam-my and authentic that you will not miss your home and in the breakfast, varieties are too much, sometime they have theme based local dishes along with standard breakfast means you name it and have it

Lovely ambience and good breakfast spread

hope place to stay over, best hospitality, food nd stuff are a bit expensive

Wonderful experience with a + grade of hospitality, food quality and taste and top notch service

What makes the property unique is the architecture of the hotel. The view from the city facing rooms are amazing because the windows literally cover the entire ceiling. Lie down at night and you can see the stars while staying indoors. Food is also pretty good at the restaurants.

Haven't expected that much class. I suggest everyone should visit at least once

Had an amazing stay here, with my wife added with some awesome food

Clean and high standard maintenance, friendly staff
but the room should have easily accessible lighting, switches, those who get up at night for the bathroom. My wife has to wake me up as the controller was on my side, and it's difficult for me to find where to push, in half asleep. Rest everything was great

Very well maintained property and u will feel very happy to see the infrastructure from inside. Staff and hospitality is also good.

The stay was good and the rooms were amazing. Superb clean and i enjoyed the stay.

Hotel staff did not support in any thing

We stayed at the mercury lagoon facing room. The view was spectacular, food was amazing. Extremely happy with the service. 5stars for their hospitality.

The staff was very accommodating and has the shortest check in time that i've experienced.

Awesome view of hotel and service also very prompt

This was the best experience until now.

Very hospitable staff, my stay was more than comfortable.excellent room service food and beautification of the hotel .overall brilliantly excellent 😊

The stay was good. The rooms are spacious, clean and with good view. The staff looked courteous but wasn’t. They need to work on the courteous way. The breakfast spread was very good and so were the other restaurants in the hotel.

Good location to stay with family or solo and friends

Good location food was good but they don’t allow outside food

Good ambience, good service, good hygiene maintained, property maintained very good

Had a bery comfortable stay at the hotel. Had a warm welcome by the front desk staff. The whole right from checking-in to checking-out was a smooth one. Excellent hospitality by the team. Looking forward to more such stays at the sahar star.

Good hotel only problem is very crowded good only for business purposes

Amazing stay and a great load a experience.

Excellent ambiance and good staff

Service was good and even the staff was handling it very nicely

Decent hotel, breakfast was amazing thou. Rooms are good but need abit of maintaince

The property is old so you can feel the same in room. My main shower was not working. Same issue with light buttons.

Lagon view is awesome, rooms are neat and clean

The hotel n the view was really amazing

Property gave me entirely different experience, amazing restaurants, wonderful breakfast. Super room layout.

Great location for t1 traveller

Had a wonderful experience, value for money.

Perfectly splendid!
To note down point wise what I liked :
1. Firstly, the warm attitude and welcome as soon as we entered the hotel was very impressive. 2. They greet every time they saw us
3. The lagoon area with the sound of the water and all the trees drags all the attention and gives so much peace.
4. I had dinner at The E.a.s.t.and it was finger licking good! 5. Swimming area is also good
6. The piano playing in the evening is just refreshing 7. Room was neat and sophisticated. Also appreciate the room service. To mention some points critically :
1. The shop at the swimming area opens late due to which we had no proper swim suit early in the morning and hence we couldn't go into the pool. 2. The rooms (mercury lagoon facing rooms) have balcony door which have no lock system. As such, anybody can enter into the room through the balcony.

Staff was good, food was excellent n room was well prepared all together nice stay.

Room menu so expensive

It was overall good stay at sahar star however breakfast could have more variety of the foods.

I would love to stay many time with #sahara star 😍

Property location is very nice, food is v nice. All safety standards in place. Room is clean

Excellent hospitality. Beautifully crafted, richly-styled
guest rooms, modern technology. World largest-pillar-
less-clear-to-sky dome. Delicious food however
exorbitant high rates. Finest leisure hotel!

Room ambience, food, staff services are excellent. Its was homely stay at hotel. Swimming pool at hotel was joy-able. Everything was superb. Hotel made our vacation memorable.

The only thing which might make u think for this hotel is It's location. Which is very close to airport. I stayed here for one day. The hotel looks very old. Not so well maintained. The shower in the bathroom was not working properly. The basin had got cracks, the iron was not working. The ironing tables has got multiple stains.

It was a great stay, rooms are maintained very well and the staff is extremely courteous. Food is excellent.

Namak restaurant is prepared very nice food for us.

Comfortable stay good place for business meetings

Ok

Food is awesome wuality and tastyb

Great stay experience at sahar star

the stay was good...staff was very polite and helpful.. 😊 we had dinner at easten restaurant the food was quite expensive but tasty..🤗 we don't like their breakfast buffet menu the food wasn't good in taste very limited dishes was there and all food was quite cool down so we don't like breakfast at all except that ambiance staff everything jst best...😊

Awesome hotel with fabulous interior design. One of best court yard landscape design.

It was worst experience ever. I wouldn’t suggest anyone same hotel to anyone. Room qaulity and view was worst ever.

I have paid for buffet thats really really high for nothing

Hotel is too much good for stay

Stay was superb beautiful surrounding i loved it

Stay was excellent and comfortable

There isn’t a hotel with a better view than sahara. The view from the balcony for your room into the lush green tropical forest is worth a million $

Memorable stay with my family i loved it and almost every thing about the hotel n love the breakfast too all the hotel staff were friendly and great hospitality

Rooms are worst, it’s totally opposite of showed in pictures. Mosquitoes are there, we have paid for mercury room which is totally worthless. Some lights aren’t working, stinking, service is bad.

All good. Sahar star is of amazing hotels

The hygine n place is really amazing i would always try it again

Love the place and food and vibes md everything

The experience here was immense. We really loved the hospitality here and the ambiance and the amenities.

Good very good stay in sharia star

Super view no buddy never get bored i this property.

Food amd beverage were quite expensive even for a five star.

Good stay and service also good refer my friends

Very pleasant stay. Everything was nice. Well decorated.

Alwayz the comfortable property

Convenient and easy to find and transit

Ordered biryani and it was really delicious

Not efficient in working and staff is less

Hello, we say to all viewers those who looking Sahara star hotel in Mumbai a want to say a hotel is a star nice ambiance great staff room service is best and food was so osam (I am loving it) nice interiors and facilities Bhai puchiya mat . pool area was nice spa area good and at in 00 level fish 🐠 aquarium in marbaolus .
at last next time, we wnt to stay there with family.

Reception area is generally very noisy and crowded. Rooms are very neat and spacious. Buffet bfast lunch and dinner very expensive and poor choice and a must avoid. Overall service is good but everyone at front gate chases you for tips. Which the hotel needs to take a serious note

The stay was good, but service was not extraordinary, need to work on the breakfast menu

Nice hotel good i like sahar star

Sahar star is one if my favorite property in mumbai. And i love being there.

I had an excellent stay at sahara. The hotel staff and service is on point. Truly satisfied with everything sahar has to offer. Their lunch buffet has a widespread varities. I loved their lamb rolls with mango sauce (this was recommended by their hotel staff. Their indoor lagoon and greenery is well maintained. Pool and gym look very creative. Worth my money! looking forward to visit this place next time )

Very goodplace to stay in mumbai

The property is at very good location and is well maintained and beautiful one. My stay was great. The ambience is awesome. Good place to stay.

Staying at Sahara Star was excellent with the professionalism of the entire staff at the same time the warmth and the feeling 9f Staying at home was felt..all thanks to.the entire staff specially thanks to the young lady by the name of Elcita she was amazing and very gud with kids and has a very bright Ora to her which enlightens every guest she greets..A big thanks to Elcita and the entire staff of Sahara Star 🌟 Mumbai..we have been to many hotels all.across the globe but it's bcoz of people like Elcita it makes it extraordinary and a class apart.thanks

Everything is great about hotel like 5 out of 5 but some room interiors are too old & dirty and need to be renovated or they should not charge 5 star prices for such rooms.

Best service and food quality

Pathetic service. No courtesy for customers by the staff. At the time of check in, gave me used room, where bathroom was soiled. Bathroom faucets & fittings are too old and not properly functioning. If you are looking for 5 star property for relaxation, definitely this is not the right choice

Bad customer service, small rooms, overall poor customer experience.

A beautiful hotel around a majestic courtyard with great ambience

Amazing interior as well as the services

We have informed to desks also

Overall it was a good experience

Comfortable room with nice ambi

Too comfortable stay. Really liked to stay. Next time surely will plan to stay with family.

Visit again cooperative staff g

Super close to domestic airport and a great view of the city. Amazing room service, very hygienic, clean, and comfortable stay.

Rooms with a great view good breakfast ☕ 🍽

only 2 juices. served. coffee was horrendous. buffet.fruits were not chosen. looked like bought outside from the street vendor. Paid for such horrendous and pathetic food being served.

Excellent staff n very close to domestic airport always staff help us

It was bad experience to stay a

Beds are not good conditions it’s too small and

You should have arrange a lift exact opposite to same lift as person staying in 4040 or 4050 has to travel your complete lobby

Good ambience, good hospitality,

Amazing experience. Will surely come again

The property is too good with g

I had made a special request to decorate the room for a newly wed couple. I had mentioned while booking and also had told the sahar star representative on phone as well. They said they will keep a message and make a towel swan when entering the room. But there was nothing such arrangements made but only a welcome message was kept.

My stay was for two days n the h

Everything was good. Enjoyed the stay.

Good hotel, but food is so costly

it was a enjoying experience of stay at sahara star.staff was cooperative n polite. bookings done by make my trip was up to the mark .we are completely satisfied .thank u. looking for more trips with u as soon as possible☺

City view rooms are okay with lot of space. Rooms were clean and had all facilities. Room service was good and food quality very good with large portions. Breakfast spread was good and service was quick. Check in and check out was also very quick.

Very comfortable stay and very cooperative staff

The stay was awesome. Me and my family enjoyed it and it was altogether great experience staying in sahar star.

Amazing stay and beautiful place

being on a luxurious stay it wasn’t good

The air-conditioning is pathetic, specially the premium rooms with glass roof. The common areas also lack cooling, it's suffocating to be in the corridors. I felt ripped off by choosing one of the premium rooms and will never choose sahar star for my future stay

Room was not ready even at 3:30pm. After complaining to the duty manager after waiting for 30minutes we were allotted the room. Nothing to add.

Room is short not worth it very high rate according to room and breakfast servants are slow i ignored but taste of breakfast is not so good

Stay and food both were excellent and great. Highly recommend hotel in Mumbai

The stay was quite comfortable. Lagoon view is worth it. Pool is operational and amazing.

superb property for stay. love the food 😋

I'm a fan of sahar star. I simply love their earth n mercury rooms with a balcony facing the lagoon. Good food good service. They should increase their food portion sent. Thats all.

I remember 10 years back once took buffet lunch here and it was my best food ever took. After so many year i got a chance to stay here and enjoyed tasty foods. Great experience.

Good business place near to airport. Has good acesbility

Same day my girl friend birthday

The hotel sahara was pure luxury with all the facilities you can think of. The food was great, the service was excellent. The rooms are spacious with a lovely atrium in the centre of the hotel. The hotel had a large pool with the state of the art spa and wellness centre

Express checkin, awesome hospitality. Comfortable rooms. All aspects full marks.

Room wash room lighting n cleanness was not good second coffee kettle was dirty

Good place near airport. Nice ambiance

Very spacious rooms and good food

Hpci was hosting the exhibition

It was amazing experience but housekeeping enters in my room room without my permission when i was sleeping. That was unexpected. Okay

The hotel is very close to highway and the rooms are good. Food is a bit pricey but good quality.

Wrost room no light n bath towel wire are hanging in room it’s not a 5star property it like 1star property i waste my money

V nice room n great food, and very polite staff

Very nice hotel and nice ambiance

Property is good though it's hot once you step outside your room as the centralized ac system fails due to glass building. Food is good but it's expensive. One must be ready to shed extra bucks in case visiting property restaurants for lunch or dinner. Recommendations : go for in room dining. No kid play area or fun zone which means that your kid is going to bored. You can't walk in between the lagoon pathways, they are just for view hence it's a disappointment. Over all experience : 7/10

Amazing experience with super cozy room and great ambiance. Good food to relish and binge on. Worth staying at this property.

Vey bed staff service we’re issues

I m happy. Me and me grill friend

Having mosquitoes in room of a five star hotel is surely not one expects.

No more words to explain. Great

The hotel lobby looks so great and so huge with lovely water falls and lot of greenery. It’s absolutely mesmerising

This is second time i stayed @ sahar on earth level and i had same issue in washroom. We cannot use the shower coz the bathing tub has such a design that all water overflows outside the tub on the washroom floor, it gets flooded with water. Horrible experience. I shall never ever either book sahar again or recommend.

It’s the location and staff very cooperative and food not good.

Got machine failure at door lock and have to wait 15 mins outside the room. Called thrice at reception but no one came till we went there. Took time to fix and denied any other room of same category. Too bad for a hotel of this level !

Location and food was good

Brilliant location. Superb food.

Want to stay again in this hotel whenever i'll come to mumbai.

One must visit. Great food and service

Very good i enjoy myself so much

Everything was good just improve the air conditioning for the sky view rooms as it gets very heated there

The stay and food was really good.

It’s super nice to stay at a property like this! super amazing stay!

Hi, mercury room is bit expensive for what it has to offer. Food was good. Comfortable stay ! will recommend to others also. Thank u team sahar star.

Property is good but service levels are poor. No complimentary in the room except the essentials in the wash room. Those are also just like that quality. Check in process is very cold

Had a pleasant stay at sahar

Good variety and taste. There were dosas, desserts, bread, tea, coffee, everything on the breakfast buffet. Nothing that i wanted and was not there.

Great experience, centrally located near airport, great ambiance, great food specially breakfast in their lagoon area, only minor issue i faced is the knob of shower was loose otherwise everything went great.

One of the best hotel to stay near airport
amazing room best hospitality
best service
lovely location
easy to access very supportive staff

Place is good but i feel room needs renovations. service was good.. they take care of guest. politely n respectfully. breakfast was not that good. taste was ok. Swimming pool is Awesome. overall had great time.

Property has luxurious ambiance with good hygiene and safety standards

Nice location with good amenities. Hotel is safe & hygienic.

It was a wonderful stay and as always staying at sahar star is always fun.

For which we paid obviously was not at all good even just because of that we didnt went for breakfast the next day and on the third day we thought lets give it another try but same it was not good and the variety was very less

Everything is so dirty ! noisy ! no one was wearing ! room to curtain to mats floor everything looks did not get washed since ages

Best hotel ever. Please visit once

From elevator to your room you have to walk too long. Senior citizens should be allotted room near elevator. But they don't consider my request. The room lighting is not enough. Very low lig, so you don't feel comfortable

It's a satisfactory stay on a business class trip but some point of view it's need some improvements further to get best. Overall review it's seems to be ok

The hotel staff are polite

We had a lovely breakfast and best thing i liked about it was open kitchen, i could see how chef was making food and it was so neat and clean. It made pretty good ambience.

Smaller rooms; very hyped, only good lobby and public areas

Excellently planned property

It's a superb place for stay, excellent connecvity to all parts of city, walkable distance to the airport, grt ambiance, excellent food and variety to choose, good place for kids. Worth for the money spent.

We took a venus suite, our shower drain was choked, the water pump was continuously leaky, our room’s carpet was stinking of alcohol. The breakfast sambhar was foul and smelly. It actually gave us an upset stomach. Sahar is not what it used to stand for. They have horribly degraded. Will not recommend a stay here. Not worth the money at all

Just 2mins walk from terminal 1

Food is amazing, variety is like uncountable, ambiance is breathtaking.

I gifted sahar stay to my mother on her birthday. My parents loved it. Room was spacious, service excellent, food quality outstanding. I would definitely recommend!

Best place to stay different concept and excellent ambiance

Good very good best hotel near airport

I loved my stay here, staff very courteous, social distancing norma followed, rooms were superb! food is very delicious! value for money

Excellent hospitality. All staff very good

Clean rooms awesome view great hospitality very near to airport

Very good service and nice staff

Every thing is good from safety too hygiene, food is awesome

The hotel’s location is good. Even though it’s near the airport there is no sound disturbance in the rooms. The staff was extremely courteous and helpful. Had a very nice and comfortable stay

One of the best hotels to stay

Good food and amazing hospitality

Best of city mumbai hotel price this hotel

Very nice and beautiful hotels

You may get a service and luxury quality time in sahar hotel mumbai

Amazing stay value for money good hotel

It was a good and peaceful stay

It was just a day stay and lot of stuff to do i wish to visit soon in any of weekend in further month.

Very remembering stay lovely and peace full stay

Property location, food and hygiene is good

Hotel structure and interiors are outstanding. Stay was good. Food quality was also good.

The place is a great value for money. Awesome design well maintained interiors

A really good experience, with cery good hospitality and cordial behaviour from the staff. I would definitely recommend and ask my close ones to visit

This place has always been never say no place. Vibrant location.

Near to airport. View is awesome from balcony

I stayed at the sahar recently. The property is magnificent. Very beautiful and well maintained

Great and a different hotel. Need some renovations in furnishings. Other than that excellent

Staff is not co-operative
items got misplaced/lost

The food quality of this hotel is fantastic but equally bad is the in room dining call attendance, one needs to keep trying multiple times to get someone on the call else it just keep ringing with no response

I wish to stay there whenever i visit mumbai

Nothing negative in our whole vstay

Property is good and situated at a very good location and service was also good. But the property is not well maintained specailly the lobby where the carpets look very old and even in the rooms need to maintained.

The plates had a lot of marks on it as well as the washroom toilets need to be changed in sometime.

I’m very much satisfaction, with the place and service

My recent visit to mumbai was an excellent one. I stayed at the sahar star hotel. That was a wonderful hotel to stay in mumbai. Sahara star hotel in mumbai, this is a five-star hotel and comes with all the modern amenities. The hotel has spacious parking where visitors could park their vehicle easy. Moreover, the entire hotel building has wireless high-speed internet and it's free. So, the hotel always crowded with visitors and most of them are tourists from a different country. I really like it because the environment is warm and it offers a good service. There are lots of staff available round day and night. The hotel staffs are amiable, professional and they welcomed the clients with the wariness of their heart. They always smiled when they treat the guests. Besides, the food of the hotel's restaurant was delicious. I had a chance to taste the traditional meals of sahar star hotel. I was pleased with all the dishes there. In short, sahar star hotel is an amazing hotel and it’s a good choice for accommodating for visitors to mumbai. If i have a chance comeback mumbai, i will enjoy sahar star hotel one more time.

Overall staff was greatly helpful. Ambiance of the hotel was greatly appreciated. Room service and facilities was great. Just had an small issue with mosquitos in the lobby and one small cockroach.

its awesome in every way. 🥰🥰🥰🥰🥰

Location not seems to be great from outside, food good, hygiene super. Safety also very good

Good hospitality. good service . good food ,clean and good staff and environment.

Enjoyed the overall ambiance. The room are great value for money as compared to a 5 star hotel. The breakfast can be better and include more variety.

When i enter in the room it was good but when i order the shower kit it takes around more than 15 mins and after shower i open the tv it was broken and then i call to hotel tech team they changed the tv in the meanwhile i was going for a meeting i was not available in the room but when i arrived in room and open tv it's still not working everything is good but hotel service is just so so

Good locatio, good good, great stay and great service

As went for Marriage Anniversary celebration 34 years. We had very beautiful memories of stay. Hotel interior, hospitality, variety of Restaurants too good, can Rate 1 outstanding. Staycation 👌.

Staff are very cooperative also late checkout available its good

First when we are arrived at hotel at check in time they told us system in not working you have to wait after the long wait i got check in, i specially mentioned for higher floor but i didn't get, serivice is poor really not happy this time my experience was not so delightful.

Good & convenient location. Food is average. Safety & hygiene standards are ok.

Excellent interiors, easy to locate, good quality is very good though it’s bit expensive, courteous staff, high hygiene and safety standards!

So good and yummy food very nice stay

Front office staff is not good i mansion queen bad they are not listening to me

Perfect location beautiful ambience n very hygiene n good food we really enjoyed staying n will surely go again in future if they give more discounted rate

Stayed mercury lagoon facing room good room n service

Sahar star it’s not like before

Everything was nice, i loved the the ambience, the food, there were privacy, and staff helped me very nicely. Thanks for the service.

Centrally located, good food n every thing taken care instantly.

Good place to stay surrounding was good

The maintenance of property is appears to be not up to the mark. I have faced light switches issues. There are some sparks while switching on and off as well as blinking of lights.

They have multiple restaurants at this property. We tried the asian restaurant - ordered dim sums and noodles, and honestly speaking they were excellent. Their service is great and the staff hygiene and ethics are commendable. Surely looking to visit again

The pathetic service and cheap staffs behavior are really making this place unworthy to stay, Staff like front desk Rohit is so immensely indecent

It's a different small world altogether in hotel. Ambience is great. Staff is very polite and service is quick. It's worth to stay here for 1 to 2 days. Lagoon was closed which is superb location for clicking photos. Staff cited covid as a reason. Before you book ask whether this is open if you are photogenic. I had ordered food quite in advance for in room but for some reason i was out of room and staff entered the room and kept food in the room. I would have appreciated if he would have waited for sometime before entering without permission.

Awesome staff, brilliant service

I really enjoyed all the services it was worth in this pandemic visiting mumbai will all security and hygiene

Food is average no a verity, location is good but room not a good ane staff service

Excellent place for stay, nice view food quality is great you can eat anytime

Nice place for couple, food quality is bad

We had been there for a weekend. Wonderful experience and amazing rooms. Good breakfast spread and overall a worth place to go for a short vacation as its close to suburbs and sobo!

It was a good stay at reasonable price

I like service for staff all are respect and great experience i’m happy to stay and feeling like home

Excellent, hygiene, property was superb

Well service and maintain social distance

The only problem being the front desk staff is very unfriendly, not at all cooperative and understanding.

It was unforgettable experience at hotel sahar star. It was our dream come true moment.

Steam was non functional. They charged me 2240 extra for a smoking room

The room are not properly dusting i was asking cinnamon powder they said sorry we don't have

Loved the room and its ambience, breakfast was nutritious

Sahar. Hotel is good food is good

Enjoyed were much value for money

Badly maintained property. Rooms are sick & dirty carpet. Hard mattresses. Shabby towels. Lot of dust around. Doesn’t feels like a star.

Could have been better if proper checks are maintained. Deficiency was compensated by some absolutely pleasant and efficient duty manager. Who really deserves an additional star for his approach

No entertainment. Got bored. Nothing to do. No activities.

Food quality, taste, service and maintenance of hotel is very very good

Bombay being busy hub, one longs for catching flights on time and that too with ease. SAHARA is always my first choice enjoying Locational advantage. Spirits are high as you enter the hotel; smiling faces, warm welcome 🤗 excellent Indian cuisine at NAMAK and personal attention by the CHEF😇🙏🥳. Always a delightful stay 🤞… And the best part is the company of a noble soul Mr Suresh who is running artefacts store on first floor in the hotel. Helps me in killing extra time, God bless him 👍

Since we went there on our wedding anniversary occasion and baby moon it was really a special time for us. We had also mentioned about this. We had visited many 5 stars always had good service in terms of making a person feel special. For the occasion atleast. Cakes room decoration arr very normal to give complimentary. But then they said we don't so such arrangements. You have to buy if you want to do such things. Overall ok. 2 star feeling

Good

Awesome test good in service is very fast

Very good hotel. Staff is very polite. Very good service. Excellent view. And excellent hotel

Everything was awesome and we'll managed. No complain required will love to stay again and again in future

3 of us stayed in 2 rooms and our stay was pleasant. Excellent service all over with superb management oversee. We will surely visit again.

Awosme test me best lovely place

It was wonderful experience for the family the entire ambience was amazing. Staff is courteous and helpful

Very pleasant stay very good location and good staff as well

hotel mind-blowing

Good service and room stay with great price

Absolutely loved ever but of the stay. It was surely a memorable experience and the room was all together another level of experience. Had an amazing spread of breakfast and love everything about the stay

It was quite pleasant and great experience

Had a gr8 stay. Very polite & helping staff. Will definitely would like to visit again. Thanks sahar

Excellent excellent room and excellent management and foods

Great stay at sahar star, enjoyed every moment as well since went for business trip, airport was very near which was quiet easy and quick to reach airport

It’s perfect stay for family, friends and kids

Property is one of the best in mumbai. Had a very comfortable stay with awesome food.

Superb experience nice place
clean place

I am very happy to stay here. I recommend my family and frnd also.

Staff is rude, specially namak restaurant. Reminding 9am for check out. Worst experience.

Had took sky view room, but we found that the glass was dirty, also two glass was broken. When we called up for room change, they could not respond promptly. Very bad experience we found. I will always suggest please don't book sky view room.

It was business trip to mumabi, i am happy to share the staff is cordial, property is nee t and clean appeared safe. Convenient check in and smooth checkout out. I strongly recommend to stay at this propriety for sure. Thanks

Great ambience, good food quality

Mostly rooms is under renovation the food is too good

The sky view room was amazing. Had a wonderful experience staying in open sky room the breakfast was average. Overall a great experience.

I was requested some flowers candles they denied too much noise inside the room

I love this place, best place for visit, thanks to my frnds.

Service provided there was amazing but just one thing i didn't like that there was a restriction due to covid that we can't bring outside food in hotel and eat leaving that everything was awesome there. As for the location it was too close to airport so it was convenient for us to reach there.

Location is great if you want near airport, but i realised there are lot of other options nearby, check in was quick and b it room conditions are not worth, curtains are full of dust and dirty, washroom and bath tubs are not maintained, certainly not the worth money

Swimming pool is very dirty, not a single boys for pick up luggage, no tv, rooms are not clean.

Everything was on point, the food, safety precautions.

Venus room glass ceiling cracked no bath suit in bathroom mosquitoes in room no room service despite 8 hrs after pressing the same

The room was good but the bar was empty. The service is great but bf has very less variety. The hotel lacks a bit on maintenance but the ambience is great.

It was amazing experience with mouth watering breakfast

I’t was amazing room i like it

Excellent stay. Gm & staff very welcoming. Enjoyed my stay and hygiene and safety standards were great.

Re inventing self. Re charging self. Creativity unlimited. Awesome food. Wonderful staff

Very good, service is great

Superb e lovely the best
hygienic

Over all smart property well maintained rooms food is bit expensive nice place to visit

This time when i went for staycation weird things happened. Hotel staff clicked pictures of ours saying it's for the hotel data when we resisted they were quite adamant. There were leakages from all the bathroom fittings. The room lights were not working properly and when we asked to changed the room they denied saying the hotel rooms are full which was not the case.

Everything was excellent no complaints

Horrible horrible horrible hygiene level. We had a stay for 2 days and my husband got bug bite and rashes due to the dirty mattress.

I went there for some alone time, which didn’t happen the staff was a little nosy and the hotel was really not upto the mark. The room was not clean, it was in a isolated location. I could’ve booked some hotel which was way better than this

I along with my wife and kids checked in at room on 20th dc 2021, because we had to board a flight on 21st dei. I had the worst insect bite ever in my lifetime at the sahar international hotel. The insect bite was immediately informed the next day to the hotel reception but they hardly bothered. The arrogance of the hotel management is unmatched. I had to undergo severe pain and itching and even today ( 23rd dc ) i am suffering immensely. It was our mistake to have checked in the sahar international hotel, where even during the peak pandemic, the hotel does not bother sanitise and clean the rooms for safety. I was sleeping separately on an extra bed and thankfully my kids ( infants ) were not sleeping with me. Such is the infection of insect bite that i have to cancel my vacations and start a treatment with some doctor. The pain is horrible but the hotel managemt needs to be sued and the bmc commissioner should take cognisance of the unhygienic standards of the hotel. The guests at the hotel do not bother to wear masks and no covid protocol is followed by the hotel management. Sick and disgusting place on the face of planet and they should be sitting behind the bars for duping innocent people of their hard earned money. Pls avoid going to this place during covid pandemic.

Spacious and clean room, excellent food and service, smiling and helpful staff

Foood quality too good nice decoration good hospitality enjoyed the stay

Sahar star is no doubt one of the posh properties. Worth living

The stay and overall experience was great and we have repeatedly visited this place for its good ambience and service.

The room ac management needs a review. Safety standards need to be better while doing big meetings. Cos-mo prof meeting was too crowded.

Good service, food is amazing. Lagoon view room is total vibe

A very nice hotel with excellent location, rooms and food

Location was easily accessible. Rooms were clean and we also got a free upgrade.

Dont know about breakfast, i didn had.

Good sportive staff, well mentain

Plea-sent stay, cooperative, helpful.

Nice hospitality very polite staff

Both weee good and up to the mark

Great location, rooms are perfect and amazing service. Can't ask for much better than sahar star. They should allow outside food as well as you don't wanna eat the same menu if you are staying for a longer duration

Wonderful hotel. Very excellent service

Very hygienic. Quick service. Could provide more vegetarian options for food.

Very warm courteous and caring staff. Loved our stay and the service. Enjoyed and wanna come back again

Fast checkin and good service breakfast spread is also good

Very wrist service staff behaviour also very bad

We have only get 50% service as described in a mm t service description for paid room. Although it is 5 star hotel but it's staff was very rude and clearly denied for the eligible service. We have very mush disappointed with the hotel staff services. Not a suggested hotel for stay in such a high cost.

It’s a hotel where you can stay if you want to be near the airport and don’t want to commute much and need a 5 star for safety purposes. Other than that, it’s not worth it. The food is just okay. Nothing is exceptionally amazing. There are mosquitoes in the rooms and bathrooms. The use of mineral water named ‘cloud 9’ in the hotel is a bad quality water bottle that local vendors at marine drive buy for 6 rupees for a big bottle and sell it for 30 rupees. Booked suits- and the charging sockets were not working, the balcony light was not working. The engineer never showed to fix it. Left my charger in the room and no body is answering and nobody searched. The staff is rude.

Location is cool but food quality is average. Hygiene also average but not good compared than others five stars property. Safety is good

Good location since it’s near by airport only problem was noise inside hotel of dj performing and disturbing other guest

Front lobby is very bad broken glass panels, window shades didnt work in room every thing is outdated and old

Visit again next time. Nice ambience.

Nice food nice location good service

We had a stay in venues room type at the property and the room was amazing. Also ordered food from room service which was very good in both quality and quantity. Had an amazing stay and will definitely come back.

Stay was comfortable and good

Everything was perfect!

Overall good stay, rooms are very small though. Balcony sit out if very good

Great location, decent room though very small.

It was just a great stay, my only issue was with the variety on b/f buffet. Rest over all amazing stay and definitely value for money.

Good staff good food and respectful service

The property is located 5 mins from international airport. the staff is very good. the service is very good. open to sky room are very good and have the best view

In all the way hotel is superb. Extra ordinary

It is great place to stay near domestic airport

Property is good, food quality & services are excellent, but front desk people need to be bit professional, as well as must have complete details of offers. Each one of them was giving different information, which i did not like.

Thank you babar for upgrading my room to mercury executive room! i lived my balcony facing the lagoon! it was beautiful and spacious! food is excellent too! will visit soon

Over all experience was good. Food was excellent.

Rooms are good, food was amazing

Satisfied with the stay and worth the penny spent

Value for money. Very good hotel. Location is in the heart of the city many restaurants around. Staff is nice and polite. Very eagre to surve your needs. Rooms are clean and spacious. Value for money.

Very good in everything service food room totally excellent

I have planned to visit zak exhibition of glass and aluminum and around exhibition complex someone suggested for this hotel and i really enjoyed it.

Excellent ambience and lovely staff. Breakfast was amazing with lot of variety to choose from. Highly recommended

Safety, cleanness and best service

The best it was hospitality was superb

No marathi news chanel restaurant staff not attentive.Most IMP not hygenic such as spoons n stru rod without cleanig served.

The property is very beautiful and food was also good

In hotel room they give u only 6 water bottles after that it is chargeable. If we are going to stay for 1 day and in are family members someone's birthday they don't give any complimentary. In breakfast they is less variety. For kid pasteries and all hard to eat with not good taste.

Easily reach from airport terminal 1 walking distance

The staff is totally non corporate, many people were fighting with them, and the staff is lier too

Our stay was so pleasurable and enjoyable we loved the property

Good food nice staff i had a very pleasant stay good location

Everything about this hotel is above expectations. We do recommend and would surely come back

The food is excellent, hotel does maintain high hygiene standards and safety wise it is very good. The staff is polite and well mannered

No one picking up the phone when called at property

Room not give me properly & also not give me any compansation.

Its one if the best hotels, and i usually prefer this due to its luxury and hygiene and neatness. Vicinity is another plus point. Restaurants are nice. Variety of indian and continental food. Very good service

I booked this hotel as it was my Wife’s birthday so it was a kinda family outing celebration, Trust me My Wife & My Parents Loved It! It's Worth It! ❤️

All was really good the service was fast it was like home

Overall i would say everything was perfect

Super i love it no1 hotel in mum

Love the room ambient, the breakfast varieties and quality was superb. Also for that, there is an open gym. Good machinery. And amazing view

Whenever i am visiting mumbai, i am staying in this hotel where we have option for nearest airport access as well as their services. You will not disappoint for your pay. Just try this hotel

Food and room best.

Great location with good connectivity. Good ambiance. Lagoon view rooms are marvelous

Hotel is quite good, located near the mumbai international airport.

Had an amazing stay. Property is superb. Food was amazing and staff was very helpful.

It’s conveniently located next to the airport

The stay was terrific. The lights were going. The staff is not supporting at any cost.

We were sitting in the lobby during our stay. waiting for our pickup,it was time for our Asar prayer and takes only two minutes,general manager behaved roughly and clearly denied performing it,we had a conversation and he stated, now onwards no Muslims are allowed to have a stay in our hotel. no rooms are vacant for Muslim public. tell all your Muslim guys

Hotel is good but they are giving me room so far from lift i was with family they are already tried and this type of happens i ha f face it

The earth lagoon room has became really old and requires furniture fixtures in the bathroom as well as tv drawers were not working. Further, the balcony lights in the deck were not working!
staff told that they will fix it in a while but no one came back.

It was a pleasant stay at this hotel

All is well good staff, good location, excellent food

Superb stay with an excellent staff and good rooms. I absolutely loved the view from the balconies. However, i strongly dislike and disagree with the no outside food and beverages allowed policy. For two reasons:
1. If you expect your guests to eat in your hotel, you must lower your prices as every dish costs an average of rs. 1000 and drinks are beyond affordable. 2. Offer your rooms with all-inclusive meals on compulsion. Also, after filling in a disclosure form, you cannot inform me that i have signed the form already that mentions the terms that no outside beverages or foods are allowed. If that, s the case, kindly inform the customer to either read the conditions or dictate them to them. Thinking about it now, i might not book sahar star again for this sole reason. I had a lot of trouble managing my food and drinks as i had gone with a group of friends, and we were on a budget. None of us were willing to spend rs. 1500 per person per meal without alcohol. We carried our own alcohol but had to face major troubles to get it in our rooms. Not worth the stress and effort.

Rooms are excellent, wonderful place to stay, service is good
strict covid rules

Very nice property value for money

Good hotel.

Sahar star is clean and neat property with a touch of glitter and glamour. The east serves very exotic food. It is having a unique architecture. Rooms are also having unique styling opening to mumbai skyline. Buffet spread is reasonable. Airport drop charges are exorbitant.

Excellent in property, location, hygiene and safety

The design, the lagoon view amaze me. I can say maybe hospitality in taj, Marriot may be a little more but the views of this sahar star are unbelievable. We planned to stay just for 2 days but this exotic hotel forced me to just enjoy more and we added 1 more day in full staycation mode, which means the full day we were in a hotel just to experience everything they have to offer. Please please visit.

Great hospitality received but then need to work on tarif.

I really like hotels surrending.

The location is very convenient, food n huygen is very good

Very rude and arrogant staff.

I have had the best experience of my life in sahar star.

Very comfortable stay as very good location, well maintained, good food, good service well trained and cooperative staff.

Sahar star is one of my favorite place, i love to stay in sahar star the food of hotel is very awesome and tasty and location is also good if you want to go andheri, lower parel then is too near from sahar star and hygiene and safety is too good compare to others

This is at airport-t1, so transfer no problem, food-expensive but very yammy. Breakfast- you will love it

Great hygiene standards and good food

One of the best and beautiful hotel in the city of dreams, it's really amazing !

I have stayed in the sahara star as a business traveller and stay was perfecty awesome and luxurious. They have a beautiful and huge dome in which they have many restaurants of different cuisines and view from the room is just awesome. Location is also good and it is near to airport and juhu beach is also not so far from the hotel. Will recommend to everyone

Best location, best food, best service

Good and comfortable stay, proper hygiene and sanitisation, security is good, ambience is nice and soothing.

Location is plus point, you have access to cab, autos, airport, and other locations. Hotel is nice, ambience is fantastic, rooms are big, washrooms are big and all services available, food at hotel is over expensive, rest all is good

Good

It is the best hotel ever i visited the hotel member are so free and so kind and room service is excellent of the hotel

I would say there shoud be some system that guest can go in elevators to different floors or else everyone has to meet in lobby and it was getting crowded

It's a really great experience to staying with hotel

Beautiful ambience with greens and aqua decor, comfortable seating, good buffet, rooms have good view. Mercury rooms have road facing view which is nice. Rooms are well clean, hygienic, nice, just that lights are little low. But overall good hotel stay. Service is also good and easy access to locations.

Great experience and good ambiance

Best location and good staff

The hotel has well trained staff to manage such a huge premise and keep it clean. Hotel has large footfall and a huge area to be maintained. It is very well maintained

Check in process is very bad at the time of booking i have requested for early check-in around 2 clock i get check-in in room after waiting 3 hours very horrible next time i will not prefer this hotel

Great stay.

We all have enjoyed the 1 day stay in sahar star.

Good safety practices and hygiene is maintained.

Location vise proper. Food was awesome. N specially staff's service.

Hotel has a good hygiene maintained everywhere plus its ambience is awesome

Lovely location and lagoon view specially in the evenings, food is awesome and hygiene was good

We had an amazing stay in sahar star. Would love to visit again.

Their staff is very nice and i love the food

God hotel to stay for get together

Very good and tremendous stay in sahara star

I stayed for business travel and stayed many times earlier too. Hotel is at great location and offer a great view from room inside lagoon and city view. Only negative point is, hotel staff need to train as per hotel catagory.

It was an excellent stay. Their staff are helpful. You have options for bars. Rooms are awesome with great lagoon view. So everything is amazing. Breakfast is great as well.

Great experience
like to visit every-time when i m at mubai

The hotel is awesome to stay. Worth the value.

Wonderful discipline maintained

I loved the stay, I was happy and the care taken by the management of Sahar Star was excellent, the standard is great.

Great food, great ambience. Little hefty on the price but worth it if you can savor the taste. The mercury room city view is excellent and the room service is prompt. Hassle-free checkin and check-out process.

Good nr aitport good staf. Food is also deilicias

Staycation at Sahara is all time go to!

Travelled with 2 yr old son and felt safe at all times in all areas.

This property is in prime location, hygiene and safety protocols are being followed properly.

The whole vibes of the place is so positive also the service is super amazing.

Yes a star is always a star. Nice place to stay and awesome food.

Cleanliness, breakfast, service. All worth mentioning. Reccomended!

Great service great food awesome ambiance.

Great stay, was here only for a day but nonetheless had good service

Good and friendly place to stay in middle of city

Hygiene, ambiance is beautiful, staff is helpful

Amazing property value for money

Really enjoyed my stay😍 It was worth it😍

We had a really pleasant stay. Spacious brightly lit rooms with amazing view. I went with my family and we really enjoy our stay. The food was also tasty. The service was fast. After swimming through mumbai traffic we found real comfort at the hotel and enjoyed ourselves.

Visited here for a relaxing day and was very happy with the standards of the hotel. From sanitation to service, all was amazing.

Location very good, food amazing, needs more focus on maintenance in washroom area.

One of the best places to stay in Mumbai

It was a good experience and outside food is not allowed.

It was a average stay.

I love sahar star food all around indie hotel. It’s hygienic and organic food !

It was wonderful stay but hotel staff was not at all friendly and there were useless rules and policies. Can't say a 100% couple friendly hotel.

It was a nice stay at this property. One must book lagoon room for the view and to feel the property.

Very good property and hotel.

We always prefer to stay at sahar star because of its location and cleanliness, except to walk more for rooms everything is so perfect.

When you are taking good amount of money, celebration cake should be complimentary. Apart when ask for room upgrade they said its not available as they are full. But if i ll pay some extra money they will upgrade. Isnt it is wow. Then rooms which are darker damp. No lights in room when paying 6k u expect something. Breakfast was tasteless. Compensate please

Chines e was good. Pizza sucked

Lost my dl while checking in and the staff did not bother to help me out. I have made 100 phone calls and they kept transferring and finally call got unanswered. Worst customer care experience.

Great food, good service and excellent ambiance

Nice stay at Sahar hotel, will prefer to stay again

Too good safety good food polite staff

Near to all work place, excellent location

Perfect location for me, closest to my work location.

Stayed for two nights. Location is near to airport. Majestic architecture of hotel, neat and clean rooms and very nice staff
buffet breakfast was good too
enjoyed my stay at sahar star
live piano player in lobby was good too
curtains in the room were operated by remote good insistence on covid protocols

The hotel was very clean and allover sanitization was excellent

One of the best stay ever. Very very nice. Perfeeeect in every way

Courteous staff, clean rooms and a great ambience. This is the third time i am staying at ss, and as what i have been repeatedly observing is that while the buffet service and food quality is great, i cant say the same about the in room dining, the taste of food compared to the price isnt justifiable. Whereas the breakfast buffet is pretty good. Overall, book this hotel if you want more than a clean room, the ambience is too good.

Ice stayed here twice with family. Once to celebrate my son's success when he went to dubai for his job. Second time for my daughter's usa visa appointment. It's best place to create good memories for important events in your life with your loved ones.

First time experience, awesome experience, enjoy the ambiance, good staff, nice location, maintained hygiene

I didn't like the room itself it's funny. It plays with your nerves.

It's very good experience and very nice hotel.

The lagoon view is awesome and rate is cheap rate it is beat in facility

Grit experience keep it up had agrt time

Nice property, good location and staff is also good

Poor hygiene poor management non friendly

No sanitisers in lobby, rooms and dining hall which can be used by guests.

On reaching hotel we were asked to wait for sometime stating that the room is getting cleaned and sanitized. On receiving keys to our room we checked in the room and realized that the room was not cleaned after the previous guest had checked out. We were allotted room before it being cleaned. We tried to call reception from room but on no one addressed our concern. We tried calling nearly 5 times but the staff said they are busy and can't attend our calls. I had to go to reception to ask they to get the room cleaned. Even after the complaining noon e attended us for next 15-20 mins. They said they will allocate another room but that room was also not cleaned and we were asked to wait for sometime in some room. It almost took one hour to get the room. Plus the manager to whom i spoke got disappeared and there was noon e to address us while we were waiting. I had to go around the floor searching for a manager who can help us. The staff lacks courtesy to even check if things were proper and we were comfortable. Staff members were not there to take the responsibility to get the room allocated on time. It was a very check-in experience. Especially in times of covid such a mistake and carelessness is highly not acceptable. Hope the hotel understands the seriousness of hygiene. Plus there are barely sanitizers around the hotel. Only one at reception and one at dining area. Rest the hotel, elevators, guest room lobby don't have any sanitizer. Hotel needs to take sanitization seriously. Overall a very poor experience

It’s a good hotel i have been staying here from last 10 years because of the service ambiance and convenience

This property’s location is exllent and wonderful. And food quality & verity so amazing.

Hotel was good. But didn't liked d room we were given handicapped room

Decent, cleanliness was there, but service was not very nice. Service could have been much better.

One of the best place to stay in the mumbai.

Good hygiene food property location superb i recommend lagoon view room book

Great stay at sahara loved it and great place to visit again

It was a good experience staying

It was a good hotel, grrat stay

Very nice place to stay nice relax. Food is amazing. Located in the best possible area

Good place for someone looking for staycation

This is very good located near airpirt n market n cleanliness hygiene friendly staff excellent

Overall good stay and good rooms

Location is average. Food was good. Safety and hygiene could be better. Overall liked it.

The property followed all the safety measures and the staff maintained the hygiene level.

If you re looking for a 5star near airport this is the best place to hop in.

The check in process was fast and rooms were allotted very quickly. The room was very clean and the balcony was amazing, the only problem with it was you could look into the balcony and room of every other room in the hotel, that violated privacy a little bit.

This is one of the best located for the customers who need good vicinity around airport.

Best place for a staycation to rest and relax.

All is great stay was comfortable. Staff helpful and food quality is also standard

Amazing ambience feels like rain forest

If you are bored this lockdown then you can go to this hotel and enjoy their stay only issue is that they don't have temperature check when you enter the hotel rest all services are good

It was a lovely stay, special thanks to Jaydeep sir for making our stay even better, thank you so much you guys. It was a fab experience 🌸

Hospitality, room decor, cleanliness and stay was excellent

The area was peaceful and music was good, the staff was very corporative and hygiene was good

Perfectly perfect. The best of them all out there.

We had a good stay, very comfortable.

This property has always been my favorite for various reasons. But, somehow this time the experience was not that good. Key was not working for the room that was allotted to us. At-least 6-7 different people tried fixing it, but no success. Finally our room was changed. In the new room, the ac temperature settings were not working, bathroom lights were not operational. Called multiple times to get it fixed. Basic necessities like plates/spoons were delivered in 20-25 minutes in the room. The hotel seriously needs major refurbishments in terms of electronics & furnishings.

Grit stay good food all is well

In this hotel you can enjoy peace and prosperity with variety of foods and can. Seat in Balcony to get enjoyment 😉

Beautifully maintained property

Great hotel for family vallue for money

The breakfast which was included in our stay wasn’t up to the mark for a 5star hotel. The quality of food needs to be improved. The rooms were very beautiful.

It was pleasant visit in Sahara hotel. Nice view and decorative place.

The rooms and service is pretty good but the rooms were on the opposite side of the lifts, and it was too much to walk

Based note heart of the city. The hotel is ideal for staycation. The place is like a huge bubble with inward facing rooms facing a man made lagoon. Definitely worth a try if you simply want to enjoy the property.

Its was my worst experience view from my room was just a tree. Waste of money talking about sound in your srounding you will get a headache because so much sound you will get from the neighbor room as well from the dinning area. Room service was very slow after calling 3 times they were showing up. Very bad experience. Breakfast was nice

Booked a triple occupancy room for 3 adults but got a shabby cot instead of a twin bed room. Check in took 20 minutes and when the room issue was raised, there was no acknowledgement of giving the adequate room as booked. Room had equipment and electricity issues -when the room service was called to help, it took about an hour. There is distinct lack of hospitality and customer experience. Not recommended for family / leisure travel.

A 5 star in every aspect. However improvements can be adopted in food. The food is very costly compared to other locations and food is not that tasty.

Good location n good view of the hotel n middle of the city as per my knowledge

Grand and nice ambience, cleanliness, nice music

We had wished for a city view room. First, we were upgraded with an atrium view room which was later changed with city view room.

Good hotel.

I have experienced best stay in this hotel wonderful ambiance and styles

Given the current situation having the option to enjoy a weekend getaway. Loved the whole experience except for the fact that the check in took a while cause there was quite a crowd checking in but i feel that since they are aware that there are going to be so many checking the rooms need to be prepared before the checking time. Apart from this the whole experience was amazing. Loved the room though the control panel doesn't work like it's supposed to and hunting for the switches was not easy. The earth lagoon view was stunning. And the breakfast buffet was scrumptious and the variety of dishes were more than satisfactory. The speed at which the live counters were delivering dishes to the table even with a full breakfast rush was just great.

Only concern was the hotel didn’t allow the bluetooth speaker. And the room service & front desk can be made better with a quick response.

The room and the adjoining balcony are just a perfect combination. It makes a working day feel peaceful. The location is also perfect. The staff is a bit slow as room service used to take forever to deliver. But overall the place is totally worth the money.

Service takes forever to reach you. We ordered for dental kit in the morning and got it by evening that should sum up my review

Very efficient and safe environment

Overall I loved it😍 Thanks.

This property looks amazing!

The staff is very courteous. Quick in response. Kid’s friendly. The lagoon view is just so fantastic. In-room dining is wonderful with immediate clearance of tray and maintaining cleanliness. Different restaurants serve different cuisine but mubrak experience is the best with superb hospitality. Keep it up 🤩🤩

Bad check-in process, poor condition of rooms, lack of responsiveness from staff made it one of the worst experiences.

So far as the worst experience in terms of room, service and food

It is vey conveniently located. Food is superb. Staff is also very courteous.

Everything was just perfect 🤟 awesome

Had a wonderful peaceful relaxation stay

Good hotel in airport.

The rooms were clean and good. However they charge you for every little thing even for water. The view was not good from our room some construction view we requested for change but they said it won’t be possible.

Must visit with friends family or couple

Such a star hotel given local branded drinking water bottle for customers, they should maintain atleast brands like aquafina, kinley, bisleri

Property adjacent to airport great location

It was pleasant and great experience there

Hotel staff was very good and helpful

Rooms need renovation
design furniture has become old and stained sinks and bathtubs are also stained wall paint touch ups are not upto the mark

They took extra money almost half the room rate for two hours, hence I ended up spending extra, otherwise, the hotel is great, must go for at least one time

The hotel started charging price for cutlery and ash tray like seriously. There should be other ways to earn but definatley not on this this was terrible way for a hotel to earn money on such things

Valuable fare.

The start was good and clean but the price was not on the higher side

Nice and well maintained rooms

Food or tea coffe was very ordinary poor staff

Staff is very friendly, I love staying there always

Very clean n very wonderful place

Everything was very peaceful and amazing

5 star property @ 5 star management

Perfect.

There were lighted switch off in the full day. So i can not enjoy the view of the hotel.

It was a beautiful stay, i loved it

Guests were much excited to visit property on their birthday. Property didn't make it any special for them. Instead majority of the property was looking shut down and even lights of all common areas were put off at 7. 30 pm. Guests couldn't explore or enjoy the property.

I have always liked staying at sahar star as i have emotional connects to hotel.

Its awesome view of hotel amazing

Awesome food, must have all meals at the hotel, go for a stroll, wonderful environment.

I had a really pleasant stay. Staff were really friendly

Property is not as much expected what is thought

Thanks sahar star for a wonderful and safe experience. Keep up the good work. Best hotel in mumbai

I would say this is best and a big one in andheri. The best part is the balcony which is really a good view.

Good stay at hotel. Very comfortable rooms and friendly staff.

As per government hotel has taken necessary steps for public. Staff is good and keeps social distancing during all activities.

All together it was a very good stay, love it.👍🏻

Good hotel nice to. Stay hire

Good clear nice view and great stops room

Good hotel very happy to stay their

I have been staying at sahar from many years because of it’s comfortable location and service.

Staff is so friendly and courteous

Love to stay at this hotel whenever i travel to mumbai

Most convenient place to stay very well connected

Rooms are clean and spacious with balcony

Safety and security were good and upto the mark

Ac was not working properly. The washroom seat is not properly attached to the wall I will fall at any point in time. washbasin mirror is not a clean proper you can not scene your face properly I didn’t expect in 5star property. lights are very less you can not click pictures in the room. Inside the room some time you get feeling of oyo type rooms trust me .overall good experience 😜

I am very happy, good service, good food and good

Its verry beautiful hotel & locasion

It's a pleasant experience in hotel
breakfast is excellent variety, service& food quality is excellent overall very good experience

Hotel stay was amazing. Everything was perfect

Really good experience food was really good n service was also good. Will recommend to try pastries and cakes at the cake shop which are available @50% discount after 7/8 pm they are simply awesome

Excellent. Dream stay, thank sahar for the service. Good luck.

Good service great food relaxing atmosphere

More distancing rules should be maintained strictly in dinning area

The rooms having balcony which helps us to sit back and relax with loved ones and spend quality time together

Sahar star is like my second home whenever i am mumbai i stay here and i get a feeling that i am at my home

This is a hotel which i always prefer because of it’s convenient location ambiance and service

It’s a homely feeling to be at sahar star. The staff is so courteous and supportive. Thanks for so warm response

Excellent and very prompt service. Its always a pleasure to stay at sahar star.<br />Everything was perfect and well taken care of.

I liked the overall hotel. Everything was fine. Couldn't find single flaw. Staff is very supportive and helpful. Thanks for making my stay pleasant.

Good experience in exploring the Sahar in Mumbai.

Very good staff best service given and all protection taken from lobby door to the room. Very clean room and very good service in breakfast loved the staff and they behavior. Very nice

Feel-ed relaxed it was very nice experience

Excellent ambience, feel good resort

Overall hotel was hygiene from entry to exit and behaviour was good i liked to stay at sahara and will recommend

Up to mark. Utmost care taken to prevent any infection

It was a great experience staying at sahar star. It was my husband's birthday and we wanted to celebrate there. Hotel gave us complimentary cake and this was a great gesture from their end

The hotel was excellent. Though had few issues with the room services, but overall stay was comfortable<br />The rooms had expired products in the washroom

Pathetic hotel.

just love cheff jihad hospitality amazing food great personality kind hearted ❤

The ambience, environment of the hotel is the best and also the cleanliness and sanitation. Apart from all the the staff is extremely polite and the services offered are great. However, when we checked in there were no bathrobes and also no doormat outside the bathroom. Apart from his everything was excellent. Would definitely visit again. <3

Best hotel to stay close to airport n d most i like is d ambience of d hotel n d lagoon room r fantastic. N d size of room is good. Evn breakfast had varieties. Would again stay der

Good ambience good food i just love the view and variety of class

everything looks good 👍 happy to stay

Everything looks good as per the hygine and covid

Its damn worth to stay y in sahara star the view, service, staff, cleanliness everything was perfect

1st floor rooms were not available, i stayed at 4th floor, room'was ok, however my last experience on 1st floor was very good, it gives a different feel, you can enjoy nature. Yet overall, balcony experience in the evening hours was good.<br />Guy was equipped with all the tools required n was following sanitation rules n was very nice, during our conversation,he explained me,the overall procedure,which was quite impressive.

Average staff it’s good cleaning ok

Great hotel and good rooms. But the structure of the hotel is very weird. If you land up getting suite you have to walk for almost 10 mins after an elevator ride. The walk is pretty bad and wish there was an alternative. Allot of the rooms are on that side as well so should definitely check availability of room close by to the elevators otherwise it was good stay

Good safety standards followed by the hotel & courteous staff

It's a really good resort and had a pleasant stay as a couple. The breakfast spread was good and the rooms are well kept and the hygiene is intact. The locations is very close to the airport so a plus pokt for people who are travel-ling by flight to chill at this resort.

Great experience staff very cooperative
good breakfast

It was a good stay at sahar star and love to visit here again !

Supp p hotel menegment and nice all person

Good staff, good food and good service

The receiptiom didnt gave me smoking zone room.

Everything thing is available at your doorstep, staf was so amazing

Excellent ambience, nice & comfortable stay with overall services.<br />Best in class seen till date.

Superb location and great connectivity and near to the airport also superb club in the premises

Really bad experience of the staying, had to change the rooms 3 times bcoz of different issues, n 1 am at night had to change the room, there is no light switch was working, had to sleep with light on n bathroom is visible from the room, bathroom blinds is also not coming down so no one can use bathroom

Good safety standards adopted by the hotel

Grateful to visit with anyone

Best arrangement

Given the covid situation we opted for a staycation at sahar star. Picked a mercury lagoon facing room which had a balcony. Good options for dinner and breakfast at earth's plate. Definitely recommend!

upto the mark... excellent standards

Had a very good time there. Thank god i choose d sahar star instead of *. Being a honeymoon couples the room were decorated ekdam jhakas. & about the breakfast uff! i loved it. Thank you mr. Ash sharma for the fabulous service

Location of hotel is very convenient it's near to airport and western express way easy to reach any where in mumbai

It was very nice & relaxing when you open the room curtains and relax in open sky, where hardy get time in busy hustle and new buildings jungles to see the night sky. Thanks guys for making look sky and morning early morning from comfort of my bed.<br />The bathroom hygiene need to be checked as the water was logging in our room.

Good

Safety standards were exercised properly. Staff was very polite, helpful and wearing all the required material for covid safety. Rooms were properly sanitized before arrival. Common areas were regularly sanitized

It was comfortable stay. Inside view room could have been better

It was average. I could hardly find sanitiser on any dinning table and plates were not clean

The only thing which we missed was that the lighting of the centre area. All the lights were down in the evening

Sahar star does maintain excellent and strict measures in terms of safety and hygiene. I am satisfied and felt comfortable. Temperature checks, compulsion of masks, sanitize r at every location and even in rooms and bathrooms. It was excellent

Very very very good love the food the view of lagoon my favorite one<br />My favourite one I really love the lagoon side but its lil costly for me 🤪 overall loved the food the lagoon view out side view

Was good but yeah sahar management is very stingy<br />Sahar star has potential but even weakness. Overall experience was good but it lacks in few things like manager and senior personnel are very rude and don’t seem to exchange greetings with customers also sahar is very stingy like switching off all lights well most of the lights after 1 am.

Good hotel. Located near airport

All in all good safety measures adopted at entrance of hotel

Great staff and service very nice staff and cleaning service great great

Good hygiene and sanitization

We stayed in earth lagoon view room, it's been a wonderful experience, i stayed fr 2 days and would wish to come bk. Great staff very humble and helpful, altogether great experience. Will visit again, worth money

We stayed in earth lagoon view room, it's been a wonderful experience, i stayed fr 2 days and would wish to come bk. Great staff very humble and helpful, altogether great experience. Will visit again, worth money.

It was my first time in any 5 star hotel, and whatever good things i heard about it, i got it for myself, good service, good food, peaceful environment, beautiful place, i love to stay there, i would love to visit again, i love this place, i will recommend others as well.

Nice stay in hotel and ambitious is good

Good facilities at reasonable cost. Great view from room.

My father has a sinus problem. Due to the air-conditioning temperature his nose had blocked and he was finding it difficult to breath. When i called the operator and asked if they had portable steam machine or vicks vapor rub they didn't have either of them. Both the items are very common and ealisy available and used in day to day life. I had to go at 3am to get the two things after which my father was much relived and stable.

Yes safely but i very upset regarding breakfast

One of the best hotels in mumbai near airport. Walking distance

Beyond expectations. Every thing was up to mark. Nothing that i did not like. Co operative staff members, and following of all vivid norms without disturbing the guests. Thank u sahar star.

We enjoyed our stay at sahar star. Rooms were spacious, nice and clean. Food was tasty and good. Service was nice and stay was comfortable with security measures pertaining to covid-19.

Nice to have sahara star for the same

Very good locetion and very good hotels room
i like hotels lobby and meeting experiance

Missed my flight and stayed at this hotel, at first felt the room size is small, far away from the lift and since non returnable booking had to stay, once stayed started liking their hospitality, hygiene, food quality, abundance lagoon area with so much beauty. Nice to stay and i’m sure wud come back here again.

Gym and all facilities like pool, gym, centre garden sitting area were shut due to covid. Bathroom entry patti marble was broken and stuck with glue, i could feel the sharp edges under my feet, had asked to clean the room in the evening while i went out for a function for 4-5 hours, which was not done and disappointing.

It was safe there were sanitize r everywhere temperature checks were done also staff was very welcoming

It's excellent to stay in sahar star. Nice and friendly environment

This is one of the best hotels for safety in Mumbai, had a very comfortable stay and enjoyed my Anniversary too... Special thanks to Jasmine, from Guest Relations in Sahara Star...
Highly recommended hotel for all to visit

I asked for smoking room, and they charged me for smoking room, and 2nd bed experience is very bed person in velet parking

It was seen that their was no seriousness about masks.

Right from entry till exit lack of intrest was evident in covid procedures followed by this hotel

Great job with everything keeping the current health crisis in mind

The hotel is best please allow visitors at-least one my visitor was came from bangalore and the reception person didn’t allowed him to come in and i was very disappointed from this

It is located near domestic airport. Goods for business traveler.

The safety standards were good

Good hotel for transit and business travellers

Worth to stay. Good for the business travellers

At the dining area socail distancing wasn't maintained but otherwise everything seemed good.

It was an average stay when ciompared.

Staff behaviour was not friendly. Food is expensive but tasty

Liquor was not allowed for me to take from outside

Very nice location and good service

Nice your hotel. Nice staf
good hotel sarvice

Superb interior and hospitality

The hotel has all safety standards and it was a comfortable stay.

Strictly followed. Polite staff. Clean and well sanitize r rooms

We had a great stay. Nice property

A wonderful hotel with great infrastructure. The ambience is unique and nice. The breakfast buffet was good. The dinner buffet was average. The staff were cordial and helpful

The stay was pleasant. Staff was cordial. Breakfast was amazing. Keep improving.

I will visit again it's an amazing stay all is set staff is very nice food is good nothing to change keep going

Excellent safety standards. Will visit soon again

Good food great ambiance lot of things to explore just need to start the pool

Superb place food is amazing. Full safety measures

The safety measures were best and all time checking of temperature was a must and without checking you are not allowed in.

I like all the think of your hotal

They are really taking safety measures right from entering the hotel, keeping disinfectant spray everywhere

Excellent happy with safety. And room was excellent with lagoon view

Rooms not very properly maintained

In total the view was good than other hotels

Not bad it was good the lobby and the view from room was awesome

Proper safety parameters were followed. Good hygiene standards maintained.

Nice staff and good food. Localtion is best

Amazing stay at the time of pandemic situation.

good all good 👌 I like safety

It was a plea-sent experience n all was good

Maintained standards as per norms.

All the things were comfortable

When we were eating buffet-breakfast at 00 level the spoon given on the table was used. We cont expect this from sahar star. We highly recommend pols check the cutlery before giving to customer

Staff is very helpful and food is amazing, its too costly though.

Found food very costly and quality was average

It was a good stay. But most of the areas need to be sanitized regularly

I went with my family. Stay was pleasant. Food was good. Hotel should have kids playing area. The room interiors. In which i stayed, was bit old one. Hotel should consider to renovate room interior and bathroom.

My stay at sahar star was average because the room was too old, but the food and cleanliness of dining and lobby was good

It was an amazing stay here

Close to airport. Luxurious and good price. Rooms are comfortable and big enough. Staff very polite and professional. Very good experience

The amenities (bathtub) as shared on the listing was not available and there was no option to upgrade to a better room categories to sum it all up i wasted my 1000 rs for a room with a bathtub and didn't get one.

Service was bad and i ask to change my room they told pay extra money

Superb excellent sahar star is best

Gr8 rooms, gr 8 food, gr 8 service.

Nice hospitality food are awesome. Best stay for family and business meetings. Total value of money

The view from the room into the center of the hotel was amazing.

Without a doubt the best part is its proximity to T1. Tip room: Ask for a room near the elevator.

Too isolated but overall ambiance was good.

The hotel is next to domestic airport and you can walk if you don't have big luggage. The breakfast is too good and plenty of options for everyone. The staff is pleasant and very supportive. They extended their support to ensure we were comfortable. Rooms are bit small for a family. Although, staff arranged an additional bed in the room. We had evening snacks and few drinks at casablanca lounge and they all were good. The drop off charges to airport were exorbitant as you expect a hotel which is next to airport should have complimentary drop off. Overall a pleasant stay.

Located quite centrally, making it great for business meetings. The hotel offers everything from an elaborate in room dining menu to plethora of restaurants, gymnasium and a wonderful spa.

It was a comfortable stay with really good breakfast buffet.

Nice location and good food. Staff also co-operate

Previous stay was not good yet thought to give another try. This time it was superb. From hygiene to food quality to service. Loved it totally! Will be my go to place now whenever in Mumbai.

Superb.

Good.

Property is very prime location. It's near to T1 airport.

All service are good, very nice, I Am happy. But drop service in MMT app specify that complimentary but in hotel they are saying it's chargeable along with Gst.

Make sure to check all things in the room before taking it

Nice stay. Delicious food. Supportive staff

Nice hotel located at domestic Airport. The rooms are spacious and the breakfast is amazing. Overall I recommend this hotel.

Better than better, staff is the best.

Entirely different experiences during the stay. Food is very good

Great place to stay with family and with loved! Nice hospitality.

Very nice all of these hotels

Was a dream to stay with family at this hotel. But found the place very ordinary. The ac was not that good. Room was small and bathroom was ok. One time stay recommend

Beautiful stay enjoyed a lot nice ambiance

It was a good experience. The property is massive with good ambience. Got a good internal view of the hotel.

This hotel front office, behaves very bad.

Do not like this hotel management and staff.

Hotel all staff are bad and room service is very late and bad food. Same time staff bad behavior.

So, I decided to celebrate my birthday this year in Mumbai and I wanted it to be classy. So, I booked Sahara Star as MakeMyTrip is so convenient and user friendly. I love booking all my travel from MakeMytrip. Stay at Sahara was good we went there and they welcomed me with a bunch of flowers decorated the room it was very nice.

It was good staying in Sahara Star.

It's was good to go for best time everything in one

The location of the hotel is excellent. The complete design itself is so amazing, makes hotel unique. Courteous staff and their service is commendable.

It was a thrilling experience to be there, be it be the hospitable staff, the exclusively exquisite elegance of the lagoon view, plentiful breakfast with variety of indian, chinese and continental cuisines, all added to my marvellous and remarkable stay.

EK DUM must hotel will recommend all my friends to book it

Best place to stay in Mumbai, in love with this place always admire this place to be in. Excellent staff and good management

As the Mumbai best in India, same the best hotel in Mumbai, no comparison room, ambiance, hospitality, food, location best.

We are two couples and stay two nights and lovely experience

The hotel is bustling at the front office and restaurants and lounge are in the lower ground but the area near the rooms is serene and the view from the room is fantastic. The only problem is the walk to the rooms if situated at the corner

I visited this property first time and I loved every bit of it, already planned next stay

A place to repeat, great hospitality, courteous staff, good food, neat and tidy room and what a view, only concern was some noise of take off and landing which was tolerable.

Proud to have Sahara Star as Indian brand in hospitality service.

Make my trip rocks and good hotel

Great room, excellent hospitality and good food

Very good stay. Dining was good. Very good location. Was very comfortable

Excellent ambiance and very good hospitality.

This is the most convenient hotel for business traveler, it's right next to the t1 terminal of Mumbai Airport.

Excellent breakfast. Good variety. Friendly staff

Good gesture of staff n pleasant stay. Thanks

Room service is poor and the toilets have gone bad as water clogging in the wash basin and extreme water spillage from tub, two shampoo 2 shower gel but no conditioner or body moisture no shoe shine either we were two. But sharing the same tower for two days till we requested and received extra towel and moisturiser and body lotion person was great and smiling

The view from the room was havoc. Food was excellent and the staffs were extremely well mannered

Food, stay and location was great

It was a pleasure staying at Sahara Star Mumbai

Nice place to stay with family

Excellent hotel to stay near Airport

Stay was just brilliant with excellent quality amenities

Excellent property with right price

Travelled for official purpose

Nice place to stay and All get relax mood because of positive atmosphere.

Room design and ambience is not good

Staff was well behaved, excellent breakfast, really enjoyed.

Good staff, good stay, average food, location is great

The balcony view is amazing and no issues of pollution and balcony opens inside the dome so fully air-conditioned. It has an amazing Arabic restaurant.

Nice and clean rooms. Good hospitality

Electric switch is very disturbed to me, otherwise all okay types, it's very beautiful hotel.<br />Electric switch is very disturbed to me, otherwise all okay types.

Not sure to reason to stay only reason view rest is worst

No tissue paper. No spoon. No tv channel guode.

Only one beer available in five Star hotel? Which is not good sign of five Star hotel

Excellent location but average food and quality

Room, food, service are excellent.

3 things I think can be changed/improved 1. At check-in I was asked to put deposit for in house bills if any. 2. Asked for bottle of water on next morning of stay but never turned up. 3. Minibar in room remains locked only staff can open it. Of course, they would have had bad experiences but by that you can't let your guest have sense of distrust at time of check-in itself.

Awesome stay. I am extremely thankful for this stay.

We stayed at Sahara yesterday and got a room allocated on the 1st floor. The room was so distant from the elevator that it takes 10 minutes to walk and reach your room. Food was also ok. However, price of food isn’t worth.

It was very nice experience. The staff was good.

The stay was so comfortable and peaceful I almost forgot I Am in Mumbai.

Hotel was luxurious with nice comfortable rooms. Food was delicious

Initially it was not as was expected due to some issues lately they made it a worth experience. Recommend to check hotel site as well for better understanding of rooms and specs.

Lagoon facing rooms are great, had the swimming pool be operational it would be great. Gym equipments are old and needs to be changed.

Great service, clean rooms, very good staff

We did not feel the warmth reception to the stay location. And they did not allow us to bring drinks from outside.

I was on business travel from 2nd to 3rd March, the hotel was so amazing and beautiful. The style of the hotel is great and you will definitely enjoy the stay here. The only thing I did not like is that the room was to far from the lift and I had to walk a very long way.

But no activity for kids. You can few board games.

No words to describe all 5 star.

At the reception the 1st question asked by a receptionist was mad how you're going to pay your food bills. 2) When I called at room dining for my food order that time the staff asked the same question, so I said I'll clear my food bills while checkout then the staff started arguing with me that was really sad when I told them that my friends are already staying next to my room no. 4098 my room no. was 4096 and my friends didn't pay a single penny for food because they always clear all the bills while checkout then also the staff didn't take my food order and this was the worst experience ever with the Sahara Star hotel. I have already informed my friends never ever stay at the Sahara hotel and I'm going spoil your hotel image in media just wait and watch.

Good location. Hotel rooms are beautiful and great food

Enjoyed the stay it was good staff were nice and humble.

It was an awesome hotel with best services.

It's like a heaven and feel really good

Near to Airport. Very good amenities.

Nice place to stay and it's really positive energy inside hotel.

It's a good hotel with nice room. Everything expected is there with cleanliness, nice toiletries and other required staff. They main issue is quality of food. That's needs to get sorted out.

The room was nice and has good facilities as you expect in 5 stars. However the key problem is the quality of food. I tried food in three different restaurants and everywhere it's just about average which is just not acceptable with so many restaurants in the hotel.

Awesome stay. Will stay again.

The experience of stay at Sahara Star is par with all leading Star rated hotels. The matter is infrastructure. The choice of rooms inner facing and Road facing completely giving different experience

Cool and peaceful location with amazing food

Very nice hotel and walking distance from terminal 1. Love place.

Not good as per name of Sahara.

I checked in for 1 night. I had fever and cold/cough during my stay. On asking basic medicines such as Crocin, it took them 20 minutes to figure out, they don't have one and then told me that they can arrange for it but it will be chargeable! How pathetic can it be. Instead of quickly helping to relieve me pain, you are asking me that the basic medicine is chargeable. Pathetic attitude of the staff :(

Very beautiful and wonderful stay

Very beautiful and wonderful stay

Location is very near to Airport

Very nice location and wonderful stay

All is very nice and beautiful ambience

The hotel is really good, once you enter it looks life a City, so big, amazing rooms and amazing food

All are very nice people in the hotel

Ambience was good, breakfast quality and taste was awesome.

Stay was good but at times staff was very rude other than that stay was good rooms are good designed good and washrooms are also clean

It was good. Hotel staff was helpful.

Highly recommended, excellent ambience

Staff inhospitable, no smile on their faces, terrible training. A bad room given which had terrible lighting. Thanks to MMT intervention, the room was changed.

The stay was amazing. Their staff service is way too good. They went out of their ways to ensure I had a fulfilling stay. Balcony view is fantastic.

Hotel is so beautiful but service in room was not good.

Had a good time Worth going to this hotel. Value for money

Traveled as a couple. Total convenience and privacy. Courtesy and customer service is best and ambience within room and outside lounge were awesome

Very convenient, near to Airport

No cash and ATM out of order. Airport drop was chargeable.

Value for money with amazing quality of food with service. We enjoyed best vegetarian thali in Manvar Restaurent.

Choice of vegetarian food in mid night buffet Was not at all good needs improvement

Staff is very well coming and breakfast is really awesome. I didn't find kids play area in such a five-star property but over all it's a excellent to stay. Little overrated in weekend.

Hotel is good, staff is good, food is too good.

Nice stay with silence zone, enjoying.

Have always stayed at Sahara for the last 6-7 visits and have always been amazed by the hospitality.

AUSUMN to visit here it's near to Airport and varieties

Very nice location nice food very good stay

Amazing ambience and restaurants, prefer lagoon facing rooms, very courteous staff

I would recommend this hotel for Solo travelers.

This property very beautiful in the Mumbai city. I would love to stay again here.

It was really good and a pleasant stay at Sahara. Relaxing and worth view from the room, only base categories room size is lit small as compared to the cost.

Can be better next time.

This is the 3rd time I have been to this place. The hotel is definitely good. The staff is helpful and easy going. The food is good but expensive. The breakfast buffet is really nice with a wide range of varieties.

Decent hotel with many more activities and shopping as added advantage within hotel. Food average.

Don’t go this hotel, very bad service.

Hotel is really beautiful. Room was also spacious. However the hotel needs to improve its service. I called up room service and asked to send housekeeping staff to the room for some urgent help. For 15 minutes, nobody turned up. Similarly at the breakfast, I ordered some food item and the staff brought it so late that my breakfast was over by that time.

Very good quality time at Mumbai

Awesome star gazing experience from the venus room.

I love staying here as rooms are big and clean and they have a balcony which is the best part of the rooms. Love staying at Sahara.

Good ambiance good room good staff good services

Excellent and very comfortable stay. Very neat and clean. Walking distance from Airport. Very courteous and well behaved staff

I order double bed blanket on 18 Feb 2020 and also my dinner plate which came after approx 1 hour and mannerless replies received from them. Marriage was also going on so it was noisy and nuisance value even in night.

It was a wonderful hotel with very courteous staff and good rooms, overall a nice stay

Definitely worth the time and money, going to visit again.

It's really wow staying with Sahara Star, excellent, superb, great.

Whenever I come to Mumbai, I always stay here. I feel at home. The staff is friendly, they even go out of the way to make you feel comfortable. Although, rooms need a little fixing, its doable. Love you Sahara team.

Nice stay. Staff behavior was warm. Room was clean and spacious

Staff is very co operative and friendly

Location is good, near to domestic Airport. Overall good stay at the hotel

It nice neat steady and well organised staffs

Stayed one night as a business traveler. The ambiance was fabulous and staff behavior was warm.

Great place to stay and cleanliness of hotel.

Everything was great and a place to stay.

I had a good stay at Sahara Star Mumbai, hotel reception area and food areas are excellent.

I was on a business trip the stay was comfortable

Sahara Star, well, is Star hotel indeed.

The food was terrible and we all got sick and the hotel staff was not supportive at all.

Fantastic place. Had a good time.

Had a wonderful two days at Sahara Star. Fantastic hotel and services. Truly impressed.

Sahara Star is a finest place to stay. I would really like to stay again when I come next to Mumbai

Good ambience and nice place to stay

The stay was good and ambience was good

I have stayed a number of times. Great views and exquisite interiors.

I was disappointed with my stay. The room was not clean when I walked it, TV was not working, there were hair stuck in the drawers, the kettle dirty, mosquitos in the room, top of lamps dirty, fly stuck in the butter at breakfast. Other than this, a hotel that tried to be stylish and trendy, but could not out it together in the overall experience. Staff working randomly as opposed to collectively. Sahara star dit not just miss the edge, it never had if to begin with. Wish I'd stayed somewhere else.

Good hotel for stay around Mumbai airport.

The hotel was well maintained. Rooms were clean. Ambience was really good and the hospitality of the Star service was on time when I asked for an iron. In addition the food was delicious and properly cooked.

I forgot money in closet and got call from hotel next day, but no solution on getting it back.

Not Worth money. Lavish but better options are available for same or less price

Hotel is very luxurious. Staff is supportive, breakfast is very good, and many items.

It was an awesome stay at your hotel and the ambience inside the hotel was spectacular and rantic and the balcony view feels that it's inside a waterfall.

It was comfortable stay. Food was expensive but good too.

The best part of this hotel is it's location. This is near domestic Airport which makes it very comfortable to catch early morning flight

Overall experience is superb and great place to stay

Shara is not as per previous standards.

All over very nice experience, staff behaviour is too good

Comfortable stay with a soft bed. Staffs are super friendly and helpful.

Beautiful hotel really like it

I reached early the check-in pushed me for an early check-in, saying the room category I booked is sold out.

When we entered the hotel, it was wow. But when we entered the room, it was not good. Minibar door was broken. Intercom was not working and sofa was stinking.

Good food great staff good service

Avoid staying at Sahara Star. The check in staff has become very rude and aggressive.

Room was small, TV and AC were not kept based on customer comfort.

Best hotel in Mumbai near airport.

Good location near to Airport, food quality also good

Food was good view from room was good

Very near to Airport and NH easy for business travelers

Used pillow covers were left behind on the bed, hand and body lotion was missing, adequate toilet paper rolls were unavailable

Balcony facing lagoon opened a new world, unforgettable experience, luxury, a new name Stay in Sahara Hotel, next door to Terminal 1.

I picked it up for a five Star experience. Room size that I got was very mediocre. I was astonished that there could be such rooms in a Star hotel. I was frankly disappointed.

Can't be any better with all its got

It was great experience and breakfast was wow.

Very expensive rest all is good

Nice neat, clean, and spacious. Comfortable rooms.

I like the balcony along with the room. Gives the feeling that we are sitting in our own balcony and listening to music.

I had booked it for a couple but the experience was not upto mark. The room different lights did not work including the sleeping lights. So we had to sleep with the lights on or with the mcb off which meant no Ac and charging points. You don't expect this to happy when you pay so much for a night.

It very good place to stay near airport just walking distance. It is beautiful hotel from inside. Loved the ambiance. Breakfast was good. Love to stay again.

I have stayed with my family in this hotel. This is a very beautiful property. Specially view. Food has abundant variety and tasty. Authentic diversified foods but consider on, food and services are pricey.

Nice stay with friends.

Staff was not so polite and not at all helpful.

Everything is good but service is slow.

Everything is good but room service is slow.

Came here for my wedding night. Pournima and Shafiya gave us a warm welcome. My wife was blindfolded as the hotel was a surprise for her and to increase her excitement Pournima offered us complimentary room decor which consisted of a towel heart on bed, rose petals In the bath tub and got a scrumptious red velvet cake ready as a sweet gesture. It really made our day memorable. The staff here is so helpful and ever smiling. I indeed felt like home. I am glad that I took the right decision to celebrate my special day with Sahara Pariwar. Would love to be back here.

Many things were not working inside my room. Not Worth for it

It always enjoyed me to live in Sahara Star I enjoyed a lot my one of favourite hotels

One of the most unsatisfying stays.

The location is amazing as it is nearby Airport. Also the interior and exterior is very fascinating and staff is nice to people. Quality rich food. Overall a very nice experience.

However, I was really disappointed with the Casablanca cafe.

The best hotel ever I have stayed n will like to go again n again

Loved the 2-day stay. Especially the food and staff hospitality.

You will enjoy. Very near to Sai mandir. Staff is good. Food is good.

This is great hotel with all facilities. I really love to stay in this hotel always. I can enjoy your day

Nice location and nice room with good breakfast.

Not happy with the room. Otherwise everything was great

It was a very pleasant stay, staff behavior is friendly.

Great location, hospitality and food.

The view from my room was awesome

I would stay again sleep was pleasant and without disturbance.

Best food I had. Near Airport which is best.

Everything was good but hotel rooms need improvement and there is only one location to catch lift and it was very very far away from my room.

Perfect package for family stay.

It was good business stay, with near to Airport location.

Very good breakfast, helpful staff.

It’s an excellent hotel deteriorating day by day. The price being charged is very high against the quality of service.

Such a nice hotel to stay. Staffs are so helpful. Do visit and enjoy the hospitality. Simply 5 Star.

Awesome ambiance, lovely surroundings and well mannered staffs along with delicious and varied variety of cuisines.

Overly attentive staff. Breakfast was like being in a Disney Park. Hotel need cosmetic face lift

The stay was superb. Facilities are amazing. The only thing that makes it decent is the staff. It's clueless and the receptionist don't understand that there are other 5 start's who are more compatible to customers than you guys.

Just amazing experience, excellent room, good room service, variety and good break fast

Cheers to the nearness to airport.

Good to stay with family's.

Had a one night stay here and it was a very good experience. Specially the lagoon facing room had an amazing view. Breakfast was equally good in quality and taste.

Good ambience. The hotel is very clean and tidy. The staff is helpful although takes time to sort out anything

The hotel was nice so as the service. But the environment was not pleasing

Excellent room but need proper check of maintenance as my room WC cover, shower cap was not intact, shower water oozing out of shower panel making outer floor wet so require Bath room mats to avoid accident due to slip especially for elders and children,

It's ambience is great. Smiling welcoming staff.

Very comfortable stay.

Loved it. One of the best stay

Superb stay after so Long. Loved it

One of the best stay after so Long

It was the most memorable stay. The hotel staff were very kind. We requested for an upgrade from City facing room to lagoon facing room, and we got the upgrade complimentary. Will definitely visit soon!

It's really best hotel to stay for Solo group and for couple also

Absolutely awesome environment.

Good, neat and clean rooms. Bath area is nice and clean. Well illuminated room. Just that breakfast and reception area is always too crowded and very noisy

The view was great City facing view.

Good to stay and near to airport.

5-star hotel are known for their service and courtesy but front desk people are worst.

Good.

Ambiance is good and location is excellent.

It's good hotel and we will stay there everytime we come to Mumbai.

Hotel is very good, staff is good but food is so expensive.

I was coming in Sahara Star first time, in this place staff was very helpful and humble. I'm definitely coming again for holidays

There was a slight error in allotment of the room which was absolutely minor. However the front desk staff were very apologetic about it and rectified it with a upgrade excellent service, ambience, food.

I came here for a wedding, and had the best experience.

Right next to the airport on main highway. Convenient to travel all across Mumbai. Walking distance from airport.

Very good location near to expo for visiting exhibition.

It was perfect for my business trip, right next to the airport.

The balcony rooms facing the interior of the hotels just gave an amazing vibe and we had a great experience overall. The staff is quite polite.

Food quality and room service is very nice.

It was really good experience- concept of hotel is amazing. Good maintenance and still scope of improvement. But overall good experience to stay in Sahara Star.

Very nice property to stay. Near to domestic airport.

I will never come in this hotel ever. In hotel you feel you are criminal that much security watching you.

Excellent staff and extremely efficient and polite. Fantastic rooms and breakfast.

I really like the hotel ambience and connectivity

Excellent property to stay near airport.

The room service should be faster and of-course a steam/sauna. Rest all was good.

I Am fully satisfied with my stay. All services including breakfast were very good.

Best service best staff best room

Nice hotel. Interior is excellent

Very poor management, no one takes action against poor service. No people to check-out helping to take luggage, in bathroom found used shaving kit, many things to share but what to tell worst management I faced. This word is enough to understand wise person. Hope they understand my problem. No worth of money.

We are in group of 4 person and it was nice awesome experience. Staff is very good and quick service.

Staying at Sahara was good. But I had asked for baby chair and I was refused that not available.

Nice place to stay with family and good for business meeting

Great location. Wonderful ambiance. Lagoon side is simply superb. Enjoyed the stay.

Hotel interiors are beautiful with excellent services enjoyed food staff is very cooperative night decoration is very nice with lots of greenery we really had a wonderful stay

Was great, will stay again. Plus visit.

Everything is just so perfect that for this property, review does not matter, so amazing.

City view rooms are not conformable at all. Location is good.

We travelled for business and chose to stay in Sahara Star for the proximity to the Airport. Highly recommended, always chose lagoon view. You would feel in heaven.

Good service good food good location

Very good hotel with happenings and relaxing.

The price charged and the rooms are not Worth a 5 experience as they claim. Rooms to elevator is like a car do in itself. Cleanliness inside the bathrooms needs to be fixed. Pillows are too loose and not comfortable. Breakfast was average. Need more variety. Bakery products needs to be improved- cupcakes, cross ants are not at all soft. Disappointed.

Excellent hospitality, enjoyed the stay

Good hotel, great interiors, great stay

So nice staff behavior. Also nice food quality. Drinks also. Excellent.

Delicious Gujarati thali. We also enjoy breakfast too much.

We both enjoyed too much. As friend in lobby. As couple in room. ND as family in hotel

A very nice hotel, located near Airport, food is good and services are also great

Soul full and relaxing. Inner view is awesome.

Best day of my life. Thanks

Hotel is located 100 meters from the airport and has all modern amenities.

Good and lively hotel Hotel is very well decorated

We totally enjoyed our stay it was amazing hope to c u guys again

Its the best place to stay near domestic airport. Just a walking distance. Book lagoon view room only as it has balcony. We definitely feel like a resort stay. Loved the stay always.

Small rooms, clean, small bathrooms, but value for money, good staff, good breakfast.

Good service and no disturbance

Food quality was good, with hospitality and ambiance and the quality of breakfast is amazing. But the reception staff are not too good. Impolite behaviour.

Well maintained and courteous staff. Didn't have any food, so no reviews on that front. Can't beat the location, quite literally 2 minutes walk to departure terminal.

Sahara Star is one of India's most beautiful hotel facilities located at the prime site in city maximum. Ambiance inside is like heaven where you get best aesthetics in terms of great architecture and infrastructure. The hospitality has got the Indian touch of warmth and richness in every sense. Must visit for travel enthusiasts.

Excellent room. Staff behavior very warm. Hotel ambiance excellent. Would definitely recommend for stay.

Nearest to Mumbai international Airport. Great view of the rooms with all major flights visible. Great breakfast along with the cruise like ambiance of the property.

Always soulful out here. Whether he friends or family.

Very nice hotel I like the hotel interior and exterior design.

Every thing is very good and all services were excellent

Near to Airport it is best to stay. New room this time was mercury and surprisingly new to stay

Location and facility are best

Nice stay great location and good luck.

Nice and clean hotel and also the facility is good. But need some improvement in cleanliness.

Nice hotel great place nice staff

Stay was very perfect and the place was too good to party because the club are in the hotel only.

Hotel was nice and comfortable, mattress and pillows were comfortable, nice view from balcony.

Heavenly stay. Must visit once a year

Stay was amazing, we enjoyed short stay there and we want again going there.

Loved the location. Convenient and accessible. Good service and great food.

The bathroom faucet was leaking which is surprising.

The staff was polite and very helpful, the service was excellent. Hygiene and cleanliness maintained.

This hotel is always like grand and his class of a own, very good and multiple restaurant vibrant and full of energetic experience, great location, good house, keeping everything thing.

I love the location, room, bathroom, design, lobby, food, staff, and practically everything.

To start with we had a large group and were very tired when we arrived at the Sahara Star and there was a delay in checking in and that took the fun away at the very first instance for the group but how Sahara Star made up for the delay and how accommodating the staff was totally showed why they are Sahara Star - - about the stay - absolutely amazing view from our room and brilliant interiors of hotel, amazing restaurants brilliant vibe and ambiance love it ! Thanks, Sahara !!

The location is great the rooms are nice. The food was great. Service was good. Staff was helpful.

The location and staff is perfect but the property needs renovation.

Good location. Very polite staff.

Nice hotel in Mumbai and best service

Best hotel in whole Mumbai and best experience.

Needs improvement on service, not at ground level boys but at management level.

Stayed for one night for a business meeting and to receive my son arriving from overseas and happy to say this is one of my favourite hotels in India with excellent ambience and lots of choices for food and very easy commute to both domestic and international Airport

Lagoon facing rooms are just simply great to stay, good food, supportive staff, tight security, Nd lovely hospitality

One of the worst services, reception staff feels they are the decision-makers, they made me insult in front of my guest. Mr. Neeraj and Mr. Arjun please change your attitude.

Room was dirty. No bathtub. Not value for money.

Each n every thing was very fabulous, but room service was some what late

Professional staff, nice service. Nice ambience

Had a fab time. Very polite, courteous, and attentive staff. Can't fault even a bit. Special thanks to Mr. Sodhi you lead an excellent team. Keep up the good work. A very satisfied customer.

Very nice hotel with mind blowing interiors and helpful staff. In room dining is little costly. Else stay is value for money

Beautiful room and worth a visit. Excellent service.

Overall best and nearest to domestic airport.

Good hotel to stay near Airport

I do recommend but I don't have a budget because the restaurant here is very costly and the age for using the gym, everything was good.

I love to stay next time in hotel.

As their slogan suggests it is actually a step ahead

The stay was fine. Food was overpriced and limited room service options. They were confused about card machine and even asked me to come to reception to pay for food. However staff is helpful.

Very good and friendly staff rooms are little small

Birthday gone right our room was lagoon facing and it was excellent to stay in this hotel.

Well it was just a day's short stay. From check-in till checkout everything was fast. And I appreciate the service provided like in-room dining was superb.

Very nice hotel to stay and enjoy the property

The stay and service was good. Food is good too, may be having more options for in room dining would help.

Very clean and very beautiful hotel.

Good.

Hotel was awesome and stay was very excellent

A pleasant place to stay with friend and family

I would say that it’s the best hotel I have stayed till date. Everything was perfect and the architecture aesthetic is a visual treat. The namak restaurant is just amazing.

The staff is rude. They can even fight with you

It was fabulous experience to stay in Sahara.

Very good location just nearby Airport one of the best food i've ever had with very helpful and friendly staff

I was told for room cleaning in morning but I come back to hotel at noon. My room not clean. then after I was told room service again at 4:00 pm. and I come hotel at 8:00 pm. Still my room messy. Then after check out time, I wait for more than 30 minutes for bag down.

Good stay friendly staff. Good ambience

Very nice hotel and will visit next time.

It was a good experience and hotel is too good

Food is ok and stay is awesome

Food is good but stay is average types of

This place besides the ambiance has one of the best team of staff working for them. The stay was great and the Booking staff (Sadhna) at the reception made sure we get the room of our choice. This willingness towards making your guests comfortable brings you here again and again. Thank you Team Sahara.

Very good and ambiance and good.

I was there with family we had best new year eve, when I checked in there was small issue with the window curtain I complained about it the next day staff gave us upgrade with tropical lagoon facing room which was way costlier then ours. 5 for everything.

Hi! Must they are high on security, courteous staff, guest requirement is paramount for them. Only I felt improvement required food, Indian cuisine- its just ghee and butter-soaked.

Location is near Airport the hotel lobby and inside laguna views ar like super

Beautifully designed hotel. Loved the look and decor of the hotel. The balcony view of lagoon was mesmerizing. Good place to go and relax. Good stay cation venue.

I wasn’t well, so we decided to book a stay in a local Mumbai hotel and spend the night not locked into house. The rooms have a wonderful view, and we felt like we were in a party despite being in our rooms enjoying our room service with great food and wonderful staff! The beds however need to be changed as they were all springy, and we couldn’t sleep at all.

Overall it was a good experience The lagoon facing rooms are excellent when it comes to the rooms size, washroom, beds and ambience etc. Buffet has got amazing different varieties of dishes, even the staff are very friendly, polite, helpful and best at their service, usually I recommend this hotel for such a experienced and courteous staff. And the way they cooperate with the guest in every services required. The hotel is in a prime location nearest to Airport, so can definitely reconsider it every time for the stay in Mumbai.

Very nice hotel staff behavior is very good.

Worst experience from the staff, we took 3 rooms to stay for a night, but they didn't allow to enter in a party after we are ready to pay.

Stayed here for new years eve. The service was excellent and the rooms were clean.

The lagoon rooms are the charm at Sahara Star and food was good.

It was a pleasant stay, staff was very curious and cooperative thy upgrade my room.

Very good location and helpful staff.

Good experience and come back next year.

It was a pleasant stay, thought I stayed for a short duration. The view of balcony is good. Food is great.

The best property to stay in mumbai.

Toilets were mismanaged, all the fittings was poorly fixed, there staff were rude in behaviour nothing called hospitality.

Though our start was not pleasant since we were given the room after two hours of waiting but the management compensated the same by providing upgrade and few complimentary items. The rooms are well maintained and clean, the lagoon view from balcony is spectacular especially during the evening. The service is prompt and the food is delicious. Earth plate buffet are worth trying. Also having a nice walk in the lagoon lobby area would definitely refresh you as the sound of the waterfall is soothing and blissful. I would specially thank Ms. Rakhee for personally helping us during the check-in process due to the delayed allotment of room.

Food quality was pathetic. I mean these days almost all hotels have mini bar in their room, which hotel locks it. There was nothing fascinating about the room. Would never recommend except being nearby to airport, there's no other facility. Staff was useless. Card machines don't work, keep on waiting for 30 minutes for a transaction. Poor hotel and service. 0 on scale of 10.

Pleasant environment, spacious room and services is quite good.

Comfortable stay. Nice staff.

Hospitality is average, so its needed to focus of that

Hoteliers treat us as second class citizens as we have booked through company instead of direct. They a lot third grade rooms.

Definitely go for a lagoon facing room instead of city facing. Worth it!

Superb stay we loved and enjoyed much in the pool

It was ok hotel not that great

Thank Sahar Star team. Amazing food and service

Connectivity is great. Place is good

The room was really clean and spacious and the lagoon view was great. Overall the stay was totally relaxing n refreshing

Very nice stay Had a great experience

The best location to stay in Mumbai new airport.

Location is a plus if wanting to stay near. Exteriors are Grand and beautiful. Food is good. But rooms are disappointment. The carpets in the room are dirty and furniture not properly dusted. Considering the quality of room the rent was high.

Inside view of hotel is excellent but need maintenance inside room. Too costly food.

Great hotel with all good facilities. A bit expensive but it's Worth it. The architecture and interior design of this hotel is amazing. If you plan to stay inside a hotel for a full day then book otherwise it's not Worth it.

No GST invoice issued by them.

Great hotel for staying, nice rooms and very clean.

Love the entire look and feel of the property one of the best experience we had.

Very nice hotel and very good location.

Pleasant stay prime location, excellent service, good food.

Even though I would have liked some priority treatment but it was very nice

Hotel is very clean and room are very spacious like the hospitality

Tv was not working Room was not cleaned Amenities was missing in the room

Nice hotel with all modern facility's, rooms are big and modern,

Excellent location and connectivity, the rooms are very good. The service is also excellent and staff is too polite and helpful. Had a wonderful experience staying in Sahara Star.

Rooms. Amenities and serviced are very good.

Good experience at hotel. Very terrible customer support. They give unreal invoice and non complaint tax laws.

Booked for my friend and her baby. They loved the hotel and enjoyed there a lot.

Very good service and food is good.

Nice ambience and great service gesture

Staff was very cooperative, the special request has been fulfilled perfectly, overall great experience for stay.

Went to stay for a day with the family, loved the atmosphere.

Good to have a stay. Awesome.

Services are late, we had to call more than 4 times to different people for chilled water.

Rooms were smaller than expected but neatly furnished and the sliding roman curtains were a pleasant surprise giving wonderful birds eye view of Delhi. Had an amazing stay

Was a very short stay but totally Worth it keep up your good work

Nice hotel wonderful staff nice and clean rooms

Had a morning flight so took this hotel as it’s next to T-1.

Great stay at the hotel. Very peaceful

Service is very slow. Rooms are too small. Room are just basic rooms no amenities. Not worth money. My experience was too bad with the hotel, I called 6-7 times at reception for luggage at the time of check out but no one came. The room and service are not work the money.

My stay at Sahara was awesome first I got a room as close to the elevators as requested, than I need to change my room because of no shower jet in the toilet the lady in the reception was very quick in helping me change my room with a shower jet and the same category the breakfast was awesome this was my second stay and will of course comeback as I and my daughter loved the swimming pool, everything is awesome about this hotel.

The hotel is very clean and luxurious. Staff is very helpful and amazing.

Felt pampered. We deserve it.

It's worth paying. Hospitality was fabulous. Looking forward to visit again.

Had a good and a short stay. Being close to domestic Airport, the travel time was much lesser

The design of the hotel is very unique and directly touch the heart of the tourist. Service, ambience, food quality and service is amazing. Worth spending it.

Good variety of food and service

Really it's a Star experience staying Mumbai Sahara Star and we enjoyed nice evening while having dinner

Travelled across the world but never seen as beautiful hotel as Sahara. Its heaven on earth with mouthwatering food, super cordial staff and full of surprises inside. A small night walk inside this earth is an life time amazing feeling. A must visit place

Good hotel and good all in food and all.

The hotel is very good with polite staff and very good service. The food is also testy

Staff very good. Food quality, excellent room, very clean and good interior. Over all excellent.

Bad hotel, not value for money.

Very beautiful property. But food needs some improvement.

It was pleasant, good stay over there.

Good location. Staffs are very good.

The room was good with a nice view. But the food we had was very very disappointing. We had food at your place twice but both the time the food was tasteless. Not upto Sahara's standard at all.

A very good hotel. Nice location.

A very good quality hotel with nice food.

The infrastructure and the ambience is superb.

Very good experience but you need to improve rooms.

Over all everything was very good

All are nice thank so much next time I also prefer this hotel.

I was a very great experience to be the part of Sahara Star. Everything was perfect

In a busy City like Mumbai when you enter Sahara Star you get a feel of beautiful landscapes and ambiance. Rooms are cozy and well equipped with modern amenities. I reached very late at night so ordered only a soup. It's tasty but different from my expectations.

Very friendly staff and well facilitated property

Good location. Nice food. Excellent service. Every thing is better. No any negative thing to say the to management.

I stay as a business traveller for a day. It was a nice stay

The hotel building and interiors are very good. The staff is very helpful and courteous.

Good stay and great location. Esp lagoon facing rooms.

Great location, excellent hospitality.

Good food and location but front desk staff is very adamant on check in timings at least they should understand not everyone will be checking in at the standard timings only.

Nice location. Each and every things are neat and clean. Cooperative staff.

It's a unique hotel experience. Room was one of the better in terms of decor. Too bad the air conditioning system was locked and it was throwing some dust in the night. Food wasn't that great, kinda ok-ok. Interiors of hotel are worth seeing and living!

It was always a great and wonderful stay at Sahara. Hotel is very good.

I had a very pleasant stay at the hotel and the food, ambience and hospitality was excellent and satisfying.

Cool. Stay. I recommend all to have a visit once

Very pleasant to stay staff is good enjoyed a lot food menu is little expensive same as bar menu also

Superb, best location, neat and clean hotel. No more words to comment.

A very comfortable stay. With Mabruk and Est having very good food. Rooms were clean and comfortable and it was very child-friendly.

Great stay nice hotel good staff

On arrival, we were next in line only for your staff to bring Indian nationals right tot the front desk before us. We waited around 30 minutes overall for check-in. Our bags took 30 minutes to be delivered to our room. We went for lunch as soon as the restaurant opened and despite a simple dish of nasi goreng being ordered we waited 45 minutes for this and this was after prompting the staff twice!

My friend and I booked this hotel online as we were traveling from Goa. I even informed them our bus was arriving early that is around 11. Upon reaching the hotel at around 11:30 we were told to wait as all rooms were booked. We waited standing in the lobby for around an hour before room was allocated to us.

It was a short quick solo trip,but it was comfortable and goes well.

Good location, excellent service

Close to old terminal. Normally they offer pick up and drop from Airport. Little signs of worn out interior. But value for money

Nice place to be had a pleasant stay.

Every thing was very nice Service was also very good, staff with smiling faces and total cleanliness Overall a good place to stay

Staff service is low quality and staff is not well trained

Had a wonderful stay at Sahara star, ideally located, comfortable and pleasant ambiance, good food, all in all a great experience.

It's very convenient to reach Airport as it's just walking distance from domestic Airport and 5 minutes drive to International Airport. Rooms are clean, well maintained, breakfast food quality is good.

It has a unique earth like shape and engulfs it's own man made universe inside. Lovely

Best food, best service.

Location of hotel is very good, just near Airport and also centre of the City

I love this hotel. I love this place.

The stay was awesome and very comfortable. The rooms are really at the ease of the people and a good rest is assured.

Good experience and good quality of food and lots of variety in breakfast, thanks MMT.

Very nice hotel with excellent service. Everyone was very courteous and receptive to our needs. Good hotel room with a balcony and nice earth lagoon view. Good variety of food selection. Highly recommended.

Awesome place, with a lovely staff. Everything runs as orchestrated for a prime performance. Top to bottom, if 10 is the highest- 10 is my vote to Sahara! Thank you to the manager who helped me there, to Rohit, to Priti and to everyone who make we love the Sahara Star hotel.

Good services and atmosphere overall

Nice ambience, close proximity to the domestic terminal and very good services

City facing rooms are better as compared to lagoon facing

We had a nice stay. The property is nice and clean. The rooms are spacious and clean. But the staff has no coordination amongst themselves. Though friendly they seem to have two different answers to all the queries we raised. They should add a children's play area, that would make the property very child friendly and one of the top choice for travellers with children. Not much other than a pool for children at this stage.

I liked the stay over there. Everything was very nice. No suggestions

Manuhaar menu and experience was awesome. City facing room structure and style was one of its kind giving feel of staying on a roof top kind accommodation. Lovely experience enjoyed thoroughly

Very conveniently located. Hotel is well maintained.

Overall experienced is superb and am satisfied!

Exact place to stay just after tiring journey giving instant relax to your mind and eyes with garden theme look from inside. Sumptuous food at reasonable prices.

I was charged extra for early check in, while day had assured they will give if any rooms available but still they charged me.

One of the finest hotel I have been to.

Good.

It's one of by best experience ever super to stay.

These is one of the best hotels I liked in Mumbai Very convenient place everything available in the hotel service its really peaceful place and we enjoyed a lot in this hotel

This hotel is located in the adjacent to domestic Airport parking space. This is a good property. The environment of hotel is very remarkable. I enjoyed stay in this hotel.

Everything was perfect, excellent is the word.

